Abraham Lincoln was an American statesman and lawyer who served as the 16th President of the United States from March 1861 until his assassination in April 1865. Lincoln led the United States through its Civil War its bloodiest war and perhaps its greatest moral, constitutional, and political crisis. In doing so, he preserved the Union, paved the way to the abolition of slavery, strengthened the federal government, and modernized the economy. Born in Hodgenville, Kentucky, Lincoln grew up on the western frontier in Kentucky and Indiana. Largely selfeducated, he became a lawyer in Illinois, a Whig Party leader, and was elected to the Illinois House of Representatives, in which he served for eight years. Elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1846, Lincoln promoted rapid modernization of the economy and opposed the Mexican American War. After a single term, he returned to Illinois and resumed his successful law practice. Reentering politics in 1854, he became a leader in building the new Republican Party, which had a statewide majority in Illinois. As part of the 1858 campaign for US Senator from Illinois, Lincoln took part in a series of highly publicized debates with his opponent and rival, Democrat Stephen A. Douglas Lincoln spoke out against the expansion of slavery, but lost the race to Douglas. In 1860, Lincoln secured the Republican Party presidential nomination as a moderate from a swing state, though most delegates originally favored other candidates. Though he gained very little support in the slaveholding states of the South, he swept the North and was elected president in 1860. Though there were attempts to bridge the differences between North and South, ultimately Lincolns victory prompted seven southern slave states to secede from the United States and form the Confederate States of America before he moved into the White House. The Confederate attack on Fort Sumter inspired the North to enthusiastically rally behind the Union. As the leader of the moderate faction of the Republican Party, Lincoln confronted Radical Republicans, who demanded harsher treatment of the South, War Democrats, who rallied a large faction of former opponents into his camp, antiwar Democrats , who despised him, and irreconcilable secessionists, who plotted his assassination. Lincoln fought back by pitting his opponents against each other, by carefully planned political patronage, and by appealing to the American people with his powers of oratory.Randall , pp. 65 87. His Gettysburg Address became an iconic endorsement of nationalism, republicanism, equal rights, liberty, and democracy. Lincoln concentrated on the military and political dimensions of the war in order to reunite the nation. He suspended habeas corpus, leading to the controversial ex parte Merryman decision, and he averted potential British intervention by defusing the Trent Affair. Lincoln closely supervised the war effort, especially the selection of generals, including his most successful general, Ulysses S. Grant. He made major decisions on Union war strategy, including a naval blockade that shut down the Souths trade. As the war progressed, his complex moves toward ending slavery included the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 Lincoln used the U.S. Army to protect escaped slaves, encouraged the border states to outlaw slavery, and pushed through Congress the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which permanently outlawed slavery. An astute politician deeply involved with power issues in each state, Lincoln reached out to the War Democrats and managed his own reelection campaign in the 1864 presidential election. Anticipating the wars conclusion, Lincoln pushed a moderate view of Reconstruction, seeking to reunite the nation speedily through a policy of generous reconciliation in the face of lingering and bitter divisiveness. On April 14, 1865, five days after the surrender of Confederate general Robert E. Lee, Lincoln was assassinated by Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth and died the next day. Lincoln has been consistently ranked both by scholarsRanking Our Presidents. James Lindgren. November 16, 2000. International World History Project. and the publicAmericans Say Reagan Is the Greatest President. Gallup Inc. February 28, 2011. as among the greatest U.S. presidents. Family and childhood Early life and ancestry Abraham Lincoln was born February 12, 1809, the second child of Thomas and Nancy Hanks Lincoln, in a oneroom log cabin on the Sinking Spring Farm near Hodgenville, Kentucky.Donald , pp. 20 22. He was a descendant of Samuel Lincoln, an Englishman who migrated from Hingham, Norfolk, to its namesake of Hingham, Massachusetts, in 1638. Samuels grandson and greatgrandson began the familys western migration, which passed through New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Virginia.Donald , p. 20. Lincolns paternal grandfather and namesake, Captain Abraham Lincoln, moved the family from Virginia to Jefferson County, Kentucky, in the 1780s.Warren, p. 4. Captain Lincoln was killed in an Indian raid in 1786. His children, including eightyearold Thomas, the future presidents father, witnessed the attack.Donald , p. 21.White, pp. 12 13. After his fathers murder, Thomas was left to make his own way on the frontier, working at odd jobs in Kentucky and in Tennessee, before settling with members of his family in Hardin County, Kentucky, in the early 1800s.Warren, p. 5.Donald , p. 21. Lincolns mother, Nancy, is widely assumed to have been the daughter of Lucy Hanks, although no record of Nancy Hanks birth has ever been found. According to William Ensign Lincolns book The Ancestry of Abraham Lincoln , Nancy was the daughter of Joseph Hanks however, the debate continues over whether she was born out of wedlock. Still another researcher, Adin Baber, claims that Nancy Hanks was the daughter of Abraham Hanks and Sarah Harper of Virginia. Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks were married on June 12, 1806, in Washington County, and moved to Elizabethtown, Kentucky, following their marriage.Warren, p. 9. They became the parents of three children Sarah, born on February 10, 1807 Abraham, on February 12, 1809 and another son, Thomas, who died in infancy.Warren, p. 9 10. Thomas Lincoln bought or leased several farms in Kentucky, including the Sinking Spring farm, where Abraham was born however, a land title dispute soon forced the Lincolns to move.Bartelt, p. 14.Warren, p. 12. In 1811, the family moved north, to Knob Creek Farm, where Thomas acquired title to of land. In 1815 a claimant in another land dispute sought to eject the family from the farm. Of the that Thomas held in Kentucky, he lost all but of his land in court disputes over property titles. Frustrated over the lack of security provided by the Kentucky title survey system in the courts, Thomas sold the remaining land he held in Kentucky in 1814, and began planning a move to Indiana, where the land survey process was more reliable and the ability for an individual to retain land titles was more secure.Warren, p. 13. In 1816, the family moved north across the Ohio River to Indiana, a free, nonslaveholding territory, where they settled in an unbroken forestWarren, p. 26. in Hurricane Township, Perry County. Warren, p. 16 and 43.Bartelt, p. 3, 5, and 16. The farm is preserved as part of the Lincoln Boyhood National Memorial. In 1860, Lincoln noted that the familys move to Indiana was partly on account of slavery but mainly due to land title difficulties in Kentucky.Sandburg , p. 20.Donald , p. 23 24. During the familys years in Kentucky and Indiana, Thomas Lincoln worked as a farmer, cabinetmaker, and carpenter.Bartelt, p. 34 and 156. He owned farms, several town lots and livestock, paid taxes, sat on juries, appraised estates, served on country slave patrols, and guarded prisoners. Thomas and Nancy Lincoln were also members of a Separate Baptists church, which had restrictive moral standards and opposed alcohol, dancing, and slavery.Donald , pp. 22 24. Within a year of the familys arrival in Indiana, Thomas claimed title to of Indiana land. Despite some financial challenges he eventually obtained clear title to of land in what became known as the Little Pigeon Creek Community in Spencer County.Bartelt, p. 24 and 104. Prior to the familys move to Illinois in 1830, Thomas had acquired an additional twenty acres of land adjacent to his property.Bartelt, p. 25 and 71. altA statue of young Lincoln sitting on a stump, holding a book open on his lap Several significant family events took place during Lincolns youth in Indiana. On October 5, 1818, Nancy Lincoln died of milk sickness, leaving elevenyearold Sarah in charge of a household that included her father, nineyearold Abraham, and Dennis Hanks, Nancys nineteenyearold orphaned cousin.Bartelt, p. 22 23, and 77. On December 2, 1819, Lincolns father married Sarah Sally Bush Johnston, a widow from Elizabethtown, Kentucky, with three children of her own.Bartelt, p. 23 and 83. Abraham became very close to his stepmother, whom he referred to as Mother.Donald , pp. 26 27.Bartelt, p. 10. Those who knew Lincoln as a teenager later recalled him being very distraught over his sister Sarahs death on January 20, 1828, while giving birth to a stillborn son.Donald , p. 20, 30 33.Bartelt, p. 37. As a youth, Lincoln disliked the hard labor associated with frontier life. Some of his neighbors and family members thought for a time that he was lazy for all his reading, scribbling, writing, ciphering, writing Poetry, etc.,White, pp. 25, 31, and 47.Donald , p. 33. and must have done it to avoid manual labor. His stepmother also acknowledged he did not enjoy physical labor, but loved to read.Bartelt, p. 66. Lincoln was largely selfeducated. His formal schooling from several itinerant teachers was intermittent, the aggregate of which may have amounted to less than a year however, he was an avid reader and retained a lifelong interest in learning.Bartelt, p. 10 and 33. Family, neighbors, and schoolmates of Lincolns youth recalled that he read and reread the King James Bible , Aesops Fables , Bunyans The Pilgrims Progress , Defoes Robinson Crusoe , Weemss The Life of Washington , and Franklins Autobiography , among others.Donald , pp.29 31, 38 43Bartelt, p. 118, 143, and 148.Warren, p. xix, 30, 46, and 48. As he grew into his teens, Lincoln took responsibility for the chores expected of him as one of the boys in the household. He also complied with the customary obligation of a son giving his father all earnings from work done outside the home until the age of twentyone.Donald , pp. 30 33. Abraham became adept at using an axe. Tall for his age, Lincoln was also strong and athletic.Warren, p. 134 35. He attained a reputation for brawn and audacity after a very competitive wrestling match with the renowned leader of a group of ruffians known as the Clarys Grove boys.Donald , p. 41. In early March 1830, partly out of fear of a milk sickness outbreak along the Ohio River, several members of the extended Lincoln family moved west to Illinois, a nonslaveholding state, and settled in Macon County, west of Decatur.Donald , p. 36.Bartelt, p. 41 and 63. Historians disagree on who initiated the move Thomas Lincoln had no obvious reason to leave Indiana, and one possibility is that other members of the family, including Dennis Hanks, might not have attained the stability and steady income that Thomas Lincoln had.Bartelt, p. 38 40. After the family relocated to Illinois, Abraham became increasingly distant from his father,Bartelt, p. 71. in part because of his fathers lack of education, and occasionally lent him money.Donald , p. 28 and 152. In 1831, as Thomas and other members of the family prepared to move to a new homestead in Coles County, Illinois, Abraham was old enough to make his own decisions and struck out on his own. Traveling down the Sangamon River, he ended up in the village of New Salem in Sangamon County.Thomas , pp. 23 53 Later that spring, Denton Offutt, a New Salem merchant, hired Lincoln and some friends to take goods by flatboat from New Salem to New Orleans via the Sangamon, Illinois, and Mississippi rivers. After arriving in New Orleans and witnessing slavery firsthand Lincoln returned to New Salem, where he remained for the next six years.Sandburg , pp. 22 23.Donald , p. 38. Marriage and children According to some sources, Lincolns first romantic interest was Ann Rutledge, whom he met when he first moved to New Salem these sources indicate that by 1835, they were in a relationship but not formally engaged. She died at the age of 22 on August 25, 1835, most likely of typhoid fever.Donald , pp. 55 58. In the early 1830s, he met Mary Owens from Kentucky when she was visiting her sister.Donald , pp. 67 69 Thomas , pp. 56 57, 69 70. Late in 1836, Lincoln agreed to a match with Mary if she returned to New Salem. Mary did return in November 1836, and Lincoln courted her for a time however, they both had second thoughts about their relationship. On August 16, 1837, Lincoln wrote Mary a letter suggesting he would not blame her if she ended the relationship. She never replied and the courtship ended. In 1840, Lincoln became engaged to Mary Todd, who was from a wealthy slaveholding family in Lexington, Kentucky.Lamb, p. 43. They met in Springfield, Illinois, in December 1839Sandburg , pp. 46 48. and were engaged the following December.Donald , p. 86. A wedding set for January 1, 1841, was canceled when the two broke off their engagement at Lincolns initiative.Donald , p. 87. They later met again at a party and married on November 4, 1842, in the Springfield mansion of Marys married sister.Sandburg , pp. 50 51. While preparing for the nuptials and feeling anxiety again, Lincoln, when asked where he was going, replied, To hell, I suppose.Donald , p. 93. In 1844, the couple bought a house in Springfield near Lincolns law office. Mary Todd Lincoln kept house, often with the help of a relative or hired servant girl.Baker, p. 142. He was an affectionate, though often absent, husband and father of four children. Robert Todd Lincoln was born in 1843 and Edward Baker Lincoln in 1846. Edward died on February 1, 1850, in Springfield, probably of tuberculosis. Willie Lincoln was born on December 21, 1850, and died of a fever on February 20, 1862. The Lincolns fourth son, Thomas Tad Lincoln, was born on April 4, 1853, and died of heart failure at the age of 18 on July 16, 1871.White, pp. 179 181, 476. Robert was the only child to live to adulthood and have children. The Lincolns last descendant, greatgrandson Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith, died in 1985. Lincoln was remarkably fond of children,White, p. 126. and the Lincolns were not considered to be strict with their own.Baker, p. 120. The deaths of their sons had profound effects on both parents. Later in life, Mary struggled with the stresses of losing her husband and sons, and Robert Lincoln committed her temporarily to a mental health asylum in 1875.Steers, p. 341. Abraham Lincoln suffered from melancholy, a condition which now is referred to as clinical depression. Lincolns fatherinlaw and others of the Todd family were either slave owners or slave traders. Lincoln was close to the Todds, and he and his family occasionally visited the Todd estate in Lexington.Foner , pp. 440 447. During his term as President of the United States of America, Mary was known to cook for Lincoln often. Since she was raised by a wealthy family, her cooking abilities were simple, but satisfied Lincolns tastes, which included, particularly, imported oysters. Early career and militia service Lincoln depicted protecting a Native American from his own men in a scene often related about Lincolns service during the Black Hawk War. In 1832, at age 23, Lincoln and a partner bought a small general store on credit in New Salem, Illinois. Although the economy was booming in the region, the business struggled and Lincoln eventually sold his share. That March he began his political career with his first campaign for the Illinois General Assembly. He had attained local popularity and could draw crowds as a natural raconteur in New Salem, though he lacked an education, powerful friends, and money, which may be why he lost. He advocated navigational improvements on the Sangamon River.Donald , pp. 40 42.sLife and Works of Abraham LincolnVolume 3The Improvement of Sangamon River Before the election, Lincoln served as a captain in the Illinois Militia during the Black Hawk War.Winkle, pp. 86 95. Following his return, Lincoln continued his campaign for the August 6 election for the Illinois General Assembly. At ,Sandburg , p. 14 he was tall and strong enough to intimidate any rival. At his first speech, when he saw a supporter in the crowd being attacked, Lincoln grabbed the assailant by his neck and the seat of his trousers and threw him.Donald , p. 46. Lincoln finished eighth out of 13 candidates , though he received 277 of the 300 votes cast in the New Salem precinct.Winkle, pp. 114 116. Lincoln served as New Salems postmaster and later as county surveyor, all the while reading voraciously. He then decided to become a lawyer and began teaching himself law by reading Blackstones Commentaries on the Laws of England and other law books. Of his learning method, Lincoln stated I studied with nobody.Donald , pp. 53 55. His second campaign in 1834 was successful. He won election to the state legislature though he ran as a Whig, many Democrats favored him over a more powerful Whig opponent.White, p. 59. Admitted to the Illinois bar in 1836,Donald , p. 64. he moved to Springfield, Illinois, and began to practice law under John T. Stuart, Mary Todds cousin.White, pp. 71, 79, 108. Lincoln became an able and successful lawyer with a reputation as a formidable adversary during crossexaminations and closing arguments. He partnered with Stephen T. Logan from 1841 until 1844. Then Lincoln began his practice with William Herndon, whom Lincoln thought a studious young man.Donald , p. 17. Successful on his second run for office, Lincoln served four successive terms in the Illinois House of Representatives as a Whig representative from Sangamon County.Simon, p. 283. He supported the construction of the Illinois and Michigan Canal, which he remained involved with later as a Canal Commissioner. In the 1835 36 legislative session, he voted to expand suffrage to white males, whether landowners or not.Simon, p. 130. He was known for his free soil stance of opposing both slavery and abolitionism. He first articulated this in 1837, saying, The Institution of slavery is founded on both injustice and bad policy, but the promulgation of abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than abate its evils.Donald , p. 134. His stance closely followed Henry Clay in supporting the American Colonization Society program of making the abolition of slavery practical by its advocation and helping the freed slaves to settle in Liberia in Africa.Foner , pp. 17 19, 67. U.S. House of Representatives, 1847 49 Lincoln in his late 30s as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives. Photo taken by one of Lincolns law students around 1846. From the early 1830s, Lincoln was a steadfast Whig and professed to friends in 1861 to be an old line Whig, a disciple of Henry Clay.Donald , p. 222. The party, including Lincoln, favored economic modernization in banking, protective tariffs to fund internal improvements including railroads, and espoused urbanization as well.Boritt , pp. 137 153. Lincoln ran for the Whig nomination for Illinoiss 7th district of the U.S. House of Representatives in 1843, but was defeated by John J. Hardin. However, Lincoln won support for the principle of rotation, whereby Hardin would retire after only one term to allow for the nomination of another candidate. Lincoln hoped that this arrangement would lead to his nomination in 1846.White, pp. 123 124. Lincoln was indeed elected to the House of Representatives in 1846, where he served one twoyear term. He was the only Whig in the Illinois delegation, but he showed his party loyalty by participating in almost all votes and making speeches that echoed the party line.Oates, p. 79. Lincoln, in collaboration with abolitionist Congressman Joshua R. Giddings, wrote a bill to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia with compensation for the owners, enforcement to capture fugitive slaves, and a popular vote on the matter. He abandoned the bill when it failed to garner sufficient Whig supporters.Harris, p. 54 Foner , p. 57. On foreign and military policy, Lincoln spoke out against the Mexican American War, which he attributed to President Polks desire for military glory that attractive rainbow, that rises in showers of blood.Heidler , pp. 181 183. Lincoln also supported the Wilmot Proviso, which, if it had been adopted, would have banned slavery in any U.S. territory won from Mexico.Holzer, p. 63. Lincoln emphasized his opposition to Polk by drafting and introducing his Spot Resolutions. The war had begun with a Mexican slaughter of American soldiers in territory disputed by Mexico and the U.S. Polk insisted that Mexican soldiers had invaded our territory and shed the blood of our fellowcitizens on our own soil .Oates, pp. 79 80.Basler , pp. 199 202. Lincoln demanded that Polk show Congress the exact spot on which blood had been shed and prove that the spot was on American soil. Congress never enacted the resolution or even debated it, the national papers ignored it, and it resulted in a loss of political support for Lincoln in his district. One Illinois newspaper derisively nicknamed him spotty Lincoln.McGovern, p. 33.Basler , p. 202. Lincoln later regretted some of his statements, especially his attack on the presidential warmaking powers.Donald , p. 128. Realizing Clay was unlikely to win the presidency, Lincoln, who had pledged in 1846 to serve only one term in the House, supported General Zachary Taylor for the Whig nomination in the 1848 presidential election.Donald , pp. 124 126. Taylor won and Lincoln hoped to be appointed Commissioner of the General Land Office, but that lucrative patronage job went to an Illinois rival, Justin Butterfield, considered by the administration to be a highly skilled lawyer, but in Lincolns view, an old fossil.Donald , p. 140. The administration offered him the consolation prize of secretary or governor of the Oregon Territory. This distant territory was a Democratic stronghold, and acceptance of the post would have effectively ended his legal and political career in Illinois, so he declined and resumed his law practice.Harris, pp. 55 57. Prairie lawyer Lincoln in 1857 Lincoln returned to practicing law in Springfield, handling every kind of business that could come before a prairie lawyer.Donald , p. 96. Twice a year for 16 years, 10 weeks at a time, he appeared in county seats in the midstate region when the county courts were in session.Donald , pp. 105 106, 158. Lincoln handled many transportation cases in the midst of the nations western expansion, particularly the conflicts arising from the operation of river barges under the many new railroad bridges. As a riverboat man, Lincoln initially favored those interests, but ultimately represented whoever hired him.Donald , pp. 142 143. In fact, he later represented a bridge company against a riverboat company in a landmark case involving a canal boat that sank after hitting a bridge.Bridging the Mississippi. Archives.gov . Retrieved August 17, 2013. Brian McGinty, Lincolns Greatest Case The River, the Bridge, and the Making of America In 1849, he received a patent for a flotation device for the movement of boats in shallow water. The idea was never commercialized, but Lincoln is the only president to hold a patent.White, p. 163. In 1851, he represented the Alton Sangamon Railroad in a dispute with one of its shareholders, James A. Barret, who had refused to pay the balance on his pledge to buy shares in the railroad on the grounds that the company had changed its original train route.Donald , p. 155.Dirck , p. 92. Lincoln successfully argued that the railroad company was not bound by its original charter extant at the time of Barrets pledge the charter was amended in the public interest to provide a newer, superior, and less expensive route, and the corporation retained the right to demand Barrets payment. The decision by the Illinois Supreme Court has been cited by numerous other courts in the nation. Lincoln appeared before the Illinois Supreme Court in 175 cases, in 51 as sole counsel, of which 31 were decided in his favor.Handy, p. 440. From 1853 to 1860, another of Lincolns largest clients was the Illinois Central Railroad.Donald , pp. 155 156, 196 197. Lincolns reputation with clients gave rise to his nickname Honest Abe. Lincolns most notable criminal trial occurred in 1858 when he defended William Duff Armstrong, who was on trial for the murder of James Preston Metzker.Donald , pp. 150 151. The case is famous for Lincolns use of a fact established by judicial notice in order to challenge the credibility of an eyewitness. After an opposing witness testified seeing the crime in the moonlight, Lincoln produced a Farmers Almanac showing the moon was at a low angle, drastically reducing visibility. Based on this evidence, Armstrong was acquitted. Lincoln rarely raised objections in the courtroom but in an 1859 case, where he defended a cousin, Peachy Harrison, who was accused of stabbing another to death, Lincoln angrily protested the judges decision to exclude evidence favorable to his client. Instead of holding Lincoln in contempt of court as was expected, the judge, a Democrat, reversed his ruling, allowing the evidence and acquitting Harrison.Harrison , p. 270. Republican politics 1854 60 Emergence as Republican leader The debate over the status of slavery in the territories exacerbated sectional tensions between the slaveholding South and the North, and the Compromise of 1850 failed to defuse the issue.White, pp. 175 176. In the early 1850s, Lincoln supported efforts for sectional mediation, and his 1852 eulogy for Henry Clay focused on the latters support for gradual emancipation and opposition to both extremes on the slavery issue.White, pp. 182 185. As the 1850s progressed, the debate over slavery in the Nebraska Territory and Kansas Territory became particularly acrimonious, and Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois proposed popular sovereignty as a compromise measure the proposal would take the issue of slavery out of the hands of Congress by allowing the people of each territory to decide the status of slavery themselves. The proposal alarmed many Northerners, who hoped to stop the spread of slavery into the territories. Despite this Northern opposition, Douglass KansasNebraska Act narrowly passed Congress in May 1854.White, pp. 188 190. For months after its passage, Lincoln did not publicly comment on the KansasNebraska Act, but he came to strongly oppose it.White, pp. 196 197. On October 16, 1854, in his Peoria Speech, Lincoln declared his opposition to slavery, which he repeated en route to the presidency.Thomas , pp. 148 152. Speaking in his Kentucky accent, with a very powerful voice,White, p. 199. he said the Kansas Act had a declared indifference, but as I must think, a covert real zeal for the spread of slavery. I cannot but hate it. I hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself. I hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world...Basler , p. 255. Lincolns attacks on the KansasNebraska Act marked his return to political life.White, pp. 203 205. Nationally, the Whigs were irreparably split by the Kansas Nebraska Act and other efforts to compromise on the slavery issue. Reflecting the demise of his party, Lincoln would write in 1855, I think I am a Whig, but others say there are no Whigs, and that I am an abolitionist ... I do no more than oppose the extension of slavery.White, pp. 215 216. Drawing on the antislavery portion of the Whig Party, and combining Free Soil, Liberty, and antislavery Democratic Party members, the new Republican Party formed as a northern party dedicated to antislavery.McGovern, pp. 38 39. Lincoln resisted early attempts to recruit him to the new party, fearing that it would serve as a platform for extreme abolitionists.White, pp. 203 204. Lincoln also still hoped to rejuvenate the ailing Whig Party, though he bemoaned his partys growing closeness with the nativist Know Nothing movement.White, pp. 191 194. In the 1854 elections, Lincoln was elected to the Illinois legislature but declined to take his seat. In the aftermath of the elections, which showed the power and popularity of the movement opposed to the KansasNebraska Act, Lincoln instead sought election to the United States Senate.White, pp. 204 205. At that time, senators were elected by the state legislature.Oates, p. 119. After leading in the first six rounds of voting, but unable to obtain a majority, Lincoln instructed his backers to vote for Lyman Trumbull. Trumbull was an antislavery Democrat, and had received few votes in the earlier ballots his supporters, also antislavery Democrats, had vowed not to support any Whig. Lincolns decision to withdraw enabled his Whig supporters and Trumbulls antislavery Democrats to combine and defeat the mainstream Democratic candidate, Joel Aldrich Matteson.White, pp. 205 208. In part due to the ongoing violent political confrontations in the Kansas, opposition to the KansasNebraska Act remained strong in Illinois and throughout the North. As the 1856 elections approached, Lincoln abandoned the defunct Whig Party in favor of the Republicans. He attended the May 1856 Bloomington Convention, which formally established the Illinois Republican Party. The convention platform asserted that Congress had the right to regulate slavery in the territories and called for the immediate admission of Kansas as a free state. Lincoln gave the final speech of the convention, in which he endorsed the party platform and called for the preservation of the Union.White, pp. 216 221. At the June 1856 Republican National Convention, Lincoln received significant support on the vice presidential ballot, though the party nominated a ticket of John C. Frmont and William Dayton. Lincoln strongly supported the Republican ticket, campaigning for the party throughout Illinois. The Democrats nominated former Ambassador James Buchanan, who had been out of the country since 1853 and thus had avoided the debate over slavery in the territories, while the Know Nothings nominated former Whig President Millard Fillmore.White, pp. 224 228. In the 1856 elections, Buchanan defeated both his challengers, but Frmont won several Northern states and Republican William Henry Bissell won election as Governor of Illinois. Though Lincoln did not himself win office, his vigorous campaigning had made him the leading Republican in Illinois.White, pp. 229 230. Eric Foner contrasts the abolitionists and antislavery Radical Republicans of the Northeast who saw slavery as a sin, with the conservative Republicans who thought it was bad because it hurt white people and blocked progress. Foner argues that Lincoln was a moderate in the middle, opposing slavery primarily because it violated the republicanism principles of the Founding Fathers, especially the equality of all men and democratic selfgovernment as expressed in the Declaration of Independence.Foner , pp. 84 88. A portrait of Dred Scott. Lincoln denounced the Supreme Court decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford as part of a conspiracy to extend slavery. In March 1857, the Supreme Court issued its decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford Chief Justice Roger B. Taney opined that blacks were not citizens, and derived no rights from the Constitution. While many Democrats hoped that Dred Scott would end the dispute over slavery in the territories, the decision sparked further outrage in the North.White, pp. 236 238. Lincoln denounced the decision, alleging it was the product of a conspiracy of Democrats to support the Slave Power.Zarefsky, pp. 69 110. Lincoln argued, The authors of the Declaration of Independence never intended to say all were equal in color, size, intellect, moral developments, or social capacity, but they did consider all men created equal equal in certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.Jaffa, pp. 299 300. Lincoln Douglas debates and Cooper Union speech Lincoln in 1858, the year of his debates with Stephen Douglas over slavery Douglas was up for reelection in 1858, and Lincoln hoped to defeat the powerful Illinois Democrat. With the former Democrat Trumbull now serving as a Republican Senator, many in the party felt that a former Whig should be nominated in 1858, and Lincolns 1856 campaigning and willingness to support Trumbull in 1854 had earned him favor in the party.White, pp. 247 248. Some eastern Republicans favored the reelection of Douglas for the Senate in 1858, since he had led the opposition to the Lecompton Constitution, which would have admitted Kansas as a slave state.Oates, pp. 138 139. But many Illinois Republicans resented this eastern interference. For the first time, Illinois Republicans held a convention to agree upon a Senate candidate, and Lincoln won the partys Senate nomination with little opposition.White, pp. 247 250. Accepting the nomination, Lincoln delivered his House Divided Speech, drawing on , A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved I do not expect the house to fall but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing, or all the other.White, p. 251. The speech created an evocative image of the danger of disunion caused by the slavery debate, and rallied Republicans across the North.Harris, p. 98. The stage was then set for the campaign for statewide election of the Illinois legislature which would, in turn, select Lincoln or Douglas as its U.S. senator.Donald , p. 209. On being informed of Lincolns nomination, Douglas stated Lincoln is the strong man of the party...and if I beat him, my victory will be hardly won.White, pp. 257 258. The Senate campaign featured the seven Lincoln Douglas debates of 1858, the most famous political debates in American history.McPherson , p. 182. The principals stood in stark contrast both physically and politically. Lincoln warned that The Slave Power was threatening the values of republicanism, and accused Douglas of distorting the values of the Founding Fathers that all men are created equal, while Douglas emphasized his Freeport Doctrine, that local settlers were free to choose whether to allow slavery or not, and accused Lincoln of having joined the abolitionists.Donald , pp. 214 224. The debates had an atmosphere of a prize fight and drew crowds in the thousands. Lincoln stated Douglas popular sovereignty theory was a threat to the nations morality and that Douglas represented a conspiracy to extend slavery to free states. Douglas said that Lincoln was defying the authority of the U.S. Supreme Court and the Dred Scott decision.Donald , p. 223. Though the Republican legislative candidates won more popular votes, the Democrats won more seats, and the legislature reelected Douglas to the Senate. Despite the bitterness of the defeat for Lincoln, his articulation of the issues gave him a national political reputation.Carwardine , pp. 89 90. In May 1859, Lincoln purchased the Illinois StaatsAnzeiger , a Germanlanguage newspaper which was consistently supportive most of the states 130,000 German Americans voted Democratic but there was Republican support that a Germanlanguage paper could mobilize.Donald , pp. 242, 412. In the aftermath of the 1858 election, newspapers frequently mentioned Lincoln as a potential Republican presidential candidate in 1860, with William H. Seward, Salmon P. Chase, Edward Bates, and Simon Cameron looming as rivals for the nomination. While Lincoln was popular in the Midwest, he lacked support in the Northeast, and was unsure as to whether he should seek the presidency.White, pp. 291 293. In January 1860, Lincoln told a group of political allies that he would accept the 1860 presidential nomination if offered, and in the following months several local papers endorsed Lincoln for president.White, pp. 307 308. On February 27, 1860, New York party leaders invited Lincoln to give a speech at Cooper Union to a group of powerful Republicans. Lincoln argued that the Founding Fathers had little use for popular sovereignty and had repeatedly sought to restrict slavery. Lincoln insisted the moral foundation of the Republicans required opposition to slavery, and rejected any groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong.Jaffa, p. 473. Despite his inelegant appearance many in the audience thought him awkward and even uglyHolzer, pp. 108 111. Lincoln demonstrated an intellectual leadership that brought him into the front ranks of the party and into contention for the Republican presidential nomination. Journalist Noah Brooks reported, No man ever before made such an impression on his first appeal to a New York audience.Carwardine , p. 97.Holzer, p. 157. Historian Donald described the speech as a superb political move for an unannounced candidate, to appear in one rivals own state at an event sponsored by the second rivals loyalists, while not mentioning either by name during its delivery.Donald , p. 240. In response to an inquiry about his presidential intentions, Lincoln said, The taste is in my mouth a little.Donald , p. 241. 1860 Presidential nomination and campaign A Timothy Cole wood engraving taken from a May 20, 1860, ambrotype of Lincoln, two days following his nomination for President The Rail Candidate Lincolns 1860 candidacy is depicted as held up by the slavery issue a slave on the left and party organization on the right. On May 9 10, 1860, the Illinois Republican State Convention was held in Decatur.Donald , p. 244. Lincolns followers organized a campaign team led by David Davis, Norman Judd, Leonard Swett, and Jesse DuBois, and Lincoln received his first endorsement to run for the presidency.Oates, pp. 175 176. Exploiting the embellished legend of his frontier days with his father , Lincolns supporters adopted the label of The Rail Candidate.Donald , p. 245. In 1860 Lincoln described himself I am in height, six feet, four inches, nearly lean in flesh, weighing, on an average, one hundred and eighty pounds dark complexion, with coarse black hair, and gray eyes. A biographer added that he had a Large head, with high crown of skull thick, bushy hair large and deep eyecaverns heavy eyebrows a large nose large ears large mouth thin upper and somewhat thick under lip very high and prominent cheekbones cheeks thin and sunken strongly developed jawbone chin slightly upturned a thin but sinewy neck, rather long long arms large hands chest thin and narrow as compared with his great height legs of more than proportionate length, and large feet. On May 18, at the Republican National Convention in Chicago, Lincolns friends promised and manipulated and won the nomination on the third ballot, beating candidates such as Seward and Chase. A former Democrat, Hannibal Hamlin of Maine, was nominated for Vice President to balance the ticket. Lincolns success depended on his reputation as a moderate on the slavery issue, and his strong support for Whiggish programs of internal improvements and the protective tariff.Luthin, pp. 609 629. On the third ballot Pennsylvania put him over the top. Pennsylvania iron interests were reassured by his support for protective tariffs.Hofstadter, pp. 50 55. Lincolns managers had been adroitly focused on this delegation as well as the others, while following Lincolns strong dictate to Make no contracts that bind me.Donald , pp. 247 250. Most Republicans agreed with Lincoln that the North was the aggrieved party, as the Slave Power tightened its grasp on the national government with the Dred Scott decision and the presidency of James Buchanan. Throughout the 1850s, Lincoln doubted the prospects of civil war, and his supporters rejected claims that his election would incite secession.Boritt , pp. 10, 13, 18. Meanwhile, Douglas was selected as the candidate of the Northern Democrats. Delegates from 11 slave states walked out of the Democratic convention, disagreeing with Douglas position on popular sovereignty, and ultimately selected incumbent Vice President John C. Breckinridge as their candidate.Donald , p. 253. A group of former Whigs and Know Nothings formed the Constitutional Union Party and nominated John Bell of Tennessee. Lincoln and Douglas would compete for votes in the North, while Bell and Breckinridge primarily found support in the South. Prior to the Republican convention, the Lincoln campaign began cultivating a nationwide teen and young adult organization, the Wide Awakes, which it used to generate popular support for Lincoln throughout the country to spearhead large voter registration drives, knowing that new voters and young voters tend to embrace new and young parties. As Lincolns ideas of abolishing slavery grew, so did his supporters. People of the Northern states knew the Southern states would vote against Lincoln because of his ideas of antislavery and took action to rally supporters for Lincoln.Murrin, John. Liberty, Equality, Power A History of the American People . Belmont Clark Baxter, 2006. As Douglas and the other candidates went through with their campaigns, Lincoln was the only one of them who gave no speeches. Instead, he monitored the campaign closely and relied on the enthusiasm of the Republican Party. The party did the leg work that produced majorities across the North, and produced an abundance of campaign posters, leaflets, and newspaper editorials. There were thousands of Republican speakers who focused first on the party platform, and second on Lincolns life story, emphasizing his childhood poverty. The goal was to demonstrate the superior power of free labor, whereby a common farm boy could work his way to the top by his own efforts.Donald , pp. 254 256. The Republican Partys production of campaign literature dwarfed the combined opposition a Chicago Tribune writer produced a pamphlet that detailed Lincolns life, and sold 100,000 to 200,000 copies.Donald , p. 254. Presidency 1860 election and secession On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected the 16th president of the United States, beating Douglas, Breckinridge, and Bell. He was the first president from the Republican Party. His victory was entirely due to the strength of his support in the North and West no ballots were cast for him in 10 of the 15 Southern slave states, and he won only two of 996 counties in all the Southern states.Mansch, p. 61. Lincoln received 1,866,452 votes, Douglas 1,376,957 votes, Breckinridge 849,781 votes, and Bell 588,789 votes. Turnout was 82.2percent, with Lincoln winning the free Northern states, as well as California and Oregon. Douglas won Missouri, and split New Jersey with Lincoln.Harris, p. 243. Bell won Virginia, Tennessee, and Kentucky, and Breckinridge won the rest of the South.White, p. 350. Although Lincoln won only a plurality of the popular vote, his victory in the electoral college was decisive Lincoln had 180 and his opponents added together had only 123. There were fusion tickets in which all of Lincolns opponents combined to support the same slate of Electors in New York, New Jersey, and Rhode Island, but even if the antiLincoln vote had been combined in every state, Lincoln still would have won a majority in the Electoral College.Nevins, Ordeal of the Union vol 4. p. 312. The first photographic portrait of the new president As Lincolns election became evident, secessionists made clear their intent to leave the Union before he took office the next March.Edgar, p. 350. On December 20, 1860, South Carolina took the lead by adopting an ordinance of secession by February 1, 1861, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas followed.Potter, p. 498. Six of these states then adopted a constitution and declared themselves to be a sovereign nation, the Confederate States of America.Donald , p. 267. The upper South and border states listened to, but initially rejected, the secessionist appeal.White, p. 362. President Buchanan and Presidentelect Lincoln refused to recognize the Confederacy, declaring secession illegal.Potter, pp. 520, 569 570. The Confederacy selected Jefferson Davis as its provisional President on February 9, 1861.White, p. 369. There were attempts at compromise. The Crittenden Compromise would have extended the Missouri Compromise line of 1820, dividing the territories into slave and free, contrary to the Republican Partys freesoil platform.White, pp. 360 361. Lincoln rejected the idea, saying, I will suffer death before I consent... to any concession or compromise which looks like buying the privilege to take possession of this government to which we have a constitutional right.Donald , p. 268. Lincoln, however, did tacitly support the proposed Corwin Amendment to the Constitution, which passed Congress before Lincoln came into office and was then awaiting ratification by the states. That proposed amendment would have protected slavery in states where it already existed and would have guaranteed that Congress would not interfere with slavery without Southern consent.Vorenberg, p. 22.Vile , Encyclopedia of Constitutional Amendments Proposed Amendments, and Amending Issues 1789 2002 pp.280 281 A few weeks before the war, Lincoln sent a letter to every governor informing them Congress had passed a joint resolution to amend the Constitution.Lupton , Abraham Lincoln and the Corwin Amendment. Retrieved January 13, 2013 Lincoln was open to the possibility of a constitutional convention to make further amendments to the Constitution.Vile , Encyclopedia of Constitutional Amendments Proposed Amendments, and Amending Issues 1789 2002 p.281 En route to his inauguration by train, Lincoln addressed crowds and legislatures across the North.Donald , pp. 273 277. The presidentelect then evaded possible assassins in Baltimore, who were uncovered by Lincolns head of security, Allan Pinkerton. On February 23, 1861, he arrived in disguise in Washington, D.C., which was placed under substantial military guard.Donald , pp. 277 279. Lincoln directed his inaugural address to the South, proclaiming once again that he had no intention, or inclination, to abolish slavery in the Southern states The President ended his address with an appeal to the people of the South We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies... The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every battlefield, and patriot grave, to every living heart and hearthstone, all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature.Donald , pp. 283 284. The failure of the Peace Conference of 1861 signaled that legislative compromise was impossible. By March 1861, no leaders of the insurrection had proposed rejoining the Union on any terms. Meanwhile, Lincoln and the Republican leadership agreed that the dismantling of the Union could not be tolerated.Donald , pp. 268, 279. Lincoln said as the war was ending Both parties deprecated war, but one of them would make war rather than let the Nation survive, and the other would accept war rather than let it perish, and the war came.March 4, 1865, Lincolns second inaugural address. The Civil War Major Anderson, Ft. Sumter commander The commander of Fort Sumter, South Carolina, Major Robert Anderson, sent a request for provisions to Washington, and the execution of Lincolns order to meet that request was seen by the secessionists as an act of war. On April 12, 1861, Confederate forces fired on Union troops at Fort Sumter, forcing them to surrender, and began the war. Historian Allan Nevins argued that the newly inaugurated Lincoln made three miscalculations underestimating the gravity of the crisis, exaggerating the strength of Unionist sentiment in the South, and not realizing the Southern Unionists were insisting there be no invasion.Allan Nevins, Ordeal of the Union vol 5 p 29 William Tecumseh Sherman talked to Lincoln during inauguration week and was sadly disappointed at his failure to realize that the country was sleeping on a volcano and that the South was preparing for war.Sherman, pp. 185 186. Historian Donald concludes that, His repeated efforts to avoid collision in the months between inauguration and the firing on Ft. Sumter showed he adhered to his vow not to be the first to shed fraternal blood. But he also vowed not to surrender the forts. The only resolution of these contradictory positions was for the confederates to fire the first shot they did just that.Donald , p. 293. On April 15, Lincoln called on all the states to send detachments totaling 75,000 troops to recapture forts, protect Washington, and preserve the Union, which, in his view, still existed intact despite the actions of the seceding states. This call forced the states to choose sides. Virginia declared its secession and was rewarded with the Confederate capital, despite the exposed position of Richmond so close to Union lines. North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas also voted for secession over the next two months. Secession sentiment was strong in Missouri and Maryland, but did not prevail Kentucky tried to be neutral.Oates, p. 226. The Confederate attack on Fort Sumter rallied Americans north of the MasonDixon line to the defense of the American nation. Historian Allan Nevins says The thunderclap of Sumter produced a startling crystallization of Northern sentiment... Anger swept the land. From every side came news of mass meetings, speeches, resolutions, tenders of business support, the muster of companies and regiments, the determined action of governors and legislatures.Allan Nevins, The War for the Union The Improvised War 1861 1862 pp.74 75Russell McClintock . Lincoln and the Decision for War The Northern Response to Secession . Chapel Hill The University of North Carolina Press. pp.254 274. . Provides details of support across the North. States sent Union regiments south in response to Lincolns call to save the capital and confront the rebellion. On April 19, mobs in Baltimore, which controlled the rail links, attacked Union troops who were changing trains, and local leaders groups later burned critical rail bridges to the capital. The Army responded by arresting local Maryland officials. Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus in areas the army felt it needed to secure for troops to reach Washington.Heidler , p. 174. John Merryman, a Maryland official involved in hindering the U.S. troop movements, petitioned Supreme Court Chief Justice and Marylander, Roger B. Taney, author of the controversial proslavery Dred Scott opinion, to issue a writ of habeas corpus , and in June Taney, acting as a circuit judge and not speaking for the Supreme Court, issued the writ, because in his opinion only Congress could suspend the writ. Lincoln continued the army policy that the writ was suspended in limited areas despite the Ex parte Merryman ruling.William C. Harris, Lincoln and the Border States Preserving the Union pp.59 71 Union military strategy After the Battle of Fort Sumter, Lincoln realized the importance of taking immediate executive control of the war and making an overall Union military strategy to put down the rebellion. Lincoln encountered an unprecedented political and military crisis, and he responded as commanderinchief, using unprecedented powers. He expanded his war powers, and imposed a blockade on all the Confederate shipping ports, disbursed funds before appropriation by Congress, and after suspending habeas corpus , arrested and imprisoned thousands of suspected Confederate sympathizers. Lincoln was supported by Congress and the northern public for these actions. In addition, Lincoln had to contend with reinforcing strong Union sympathies in the border slave states and keeping the war from becoming an international conflict.Donald , pp. 303 304 Carwardine , pp. 163 164. Running the Machine An 1864 political cartoon satirizing Lincolns administration featuring William Fessenden, Edwin Stanton, William Seward, Gideon Welles, Lincoln and others. The war effort was the source of continued disparagement of Lincoln, and dominated his time and attention. From the start, it was clear that bipartisan support would be essential to success in the war effort, and any manner of compromise alienated factions on both sides of the aisle, such as the appointment of Republicans and Democrats to command positions in the Union Army. Copperheads criticized Lincoln for refusing to compromise on the slavery issue. Conversely, the Radical Republicans criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery.Donald , pp. 315, 331 333, 338 339, 417. On August 6, 1861, Lincoln signed the Confiscation Act that authorized judiciary proceedings to confiscate and free slaves who were used to support the Confederate war effort. In practice, the law had little effect, but it did signal political support for abolishing slavery in the Confederacy.Donald , p. 314 Carwardine , p. 178. In late August 1861, General John C. Frmont, the 1856 Republican presidential nominee, issued, without consulting his superiors in Washington, a proclamation of martial law in Missouri. He declared that any citizen found bearing arms could be courtmartialed and shot, and that slaves of persons aiding the rebellion would be freed. Frmont was already under a cloud with charges of negligence in his command of the Department of the West compounded with allegations of fraud and corruption. Lincoln overruled Frmonts proclamation. Lincoln believed that Fremonts emancipation was political neither militarily necessary nor legal.Donald , pp. 314 317. After Lincoln acted, Union enlistments from Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri increased by over 40,000 troops.Carwardine , p. 181. In foreign policy, Lincolns main goal was to stop military aid from countries abroad to the Confederacy. Lincoln left most diplomatic matters to his Secretary of State, William Seward. At times Seward was too bellicose, so for balance Lincoln stuck a close working relationship with Senator Charles Sumner, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.Donald , p. 322. The Trent Affair of late 1861 threatened war with Great Britain. The U.S. Navy had illegally intercepted a British mail ship, the Trent , on the high seas and seized two Confederate envoys Britain protested vehemently while the U.S. cheered. Lincoln ended the crisis by releasing the two diplomats. Biographer James G. Randall has dissected Lincolns successful techniques his restraint, his avoidance of any outward expression of truculence, his early softening of State Departments attitude toward Britain, his deference toward Seward and Sumner, his withholding of his own paper prepared for the occasion, his readiness to arbitrate, his golden silence in addressing Congress, his shrewdness in recognizing that war must be averted, and his clear perception that a point could be clinched for Americas true position at the same time that full satisfaction was given to a friendly country. quoted in Kevin Peraino, Lincoln in the World The Making of a Statesman and the Dawn of American Power pp 160 61. Lincoln painstakingly monitored the telegraphic reports coming into the War Department headquarters. He kept close tabs on all phases of the military effort, consulted with governors, and selected generals based on their past success . In January 1862, after many complaints of inefficiency and profiteering in the War Department, Lincoln replaced Simon Cameron with Edwin Stanton as War Secretary. Stanton centralized the War Departments activities, auditing and cancelling contracts, saving the federal government 17,000,000. Stanton was a staunchly Unionist probusiness conservative Democrat who moved toward the Radical Republican faction. Nevertheless, he worked more often and more closely with Lincoln than any other senior official. Stanton and Lincoln virtually conducted the war together, say Thomas and Hyman.Benjamin P. Thomas and Harold M. Hyman, Stanton, the Life and Times of Lincolns Secretary of War pp. 71, 87, 229 30, 385 In terms of war strategy, Lincoln articulated two priorities to ensure that Washington was welldefended, and to conduct an aggressive war effort that would satisfy the demand in the North for prompt, decisive victory major Northern newspaper editors expected victory within 90 days.Donald , pp. 295 296. Twice a week, Lincoln would meet with his cabinet in the afternoon, and occasionally Mary Lincoln would force him to take a carriage ride because she was concerned he was working too hard.Donald , pp. 391 392. Lincoln learned from reading the theoretical book of his chief of staff General Henry Halleck, a disciple of the European strategist Jomini he began to appreciate the critical need to control strategic points, such as the Mississippi River.Ambrose, pp. 7, 66, 159. Lincoln saw the importance of Vicksburg and understood the necessity of defeating the enemys army, rather than simply capturing territory.Donald , pp. 432 436. General McClellan After the Union rout at Bull Run, the first major battle of the Civil War, and the retirement of the aged Winfield Scott in late 1861, Lincoln appointed Major General George B. McClellan generalinchief of all the Union armies.Donald , pp. 318 319. McClellan, a young West Point graduate, railroad executive, and Pennsylvania Democrat, took several months to plan and attempt his Peninsula Campaign, longer than Lincoln wanted. The campaigns objective was to capture Richmond by moving the Army of the Potomac by boat to the peninsula and then overland to the Confederate capital. McClellans repeated delays frustrated Lincoln and Congress, as did his position that no troops were needed to defend Washington. Lincoln insisted on holding some of McClellans troops in defense of the capital McClellan, who consistently overestimated the strength of Confederate troops, blamed this decision for the ultimate failure of the Peninsula Campaign.Donald , pp. 349 352. Lincoln and George McClellan after the Battle of Antietam in 1862 Lincoln removed McClellan as generalinchief in March 1862, after McClellans Harrisons Landing Letter, in which he offered unsolicited political advice to Lincoln urging caution in the war effort.Donald , pp. 360 361. The office remained empty until July, when Henry Halleck was selected for it.Henry W. Halleck Civil War Trust . Retrieved March 28, 2016. McClellans letter incensed Radical Republicans, who successfully pressured Lincoln to appoint John Pope, a Republican, as head of the new Army of Virginia. Pope complied with Lincolns strategic desire to move toward Richmond from the north, thus protecting the capital from attack.Nevins , pp. 2159 162. However, lacking requested reinforcements from McClellan, now commanding the Army of the Potomac, Pope was soundly defeated at the Second Battle of Bull Run in the summer of 1862, forcing the Army of the Potomac to defend Washington for a second time. The war also expanded with naval operations in 1862 when the CSS Virginia , formerly the USS Merrimack , damaged or destroyed three Union vessels in Norfolk, Virginia, before being engaged and damaged by the USS Monitor . Lincoln closely reviewed the dispatches and interrogated naval officers during their clash in the Battle of Hampton Roads.Donald , pp. 339 340. Despite his dissatisfaction with McClellans failure to reinforce Pope, Lincoln was desperate, and restored him to command of all forces around Washington, to the dismay of all in his cabinet but Seward.Goodwin, pp. 478 479. Two days after McClellans return to command, General Robert E. Lees forces crossed the Potomac River into Maryland, leading to the Battle of Antietam in September 1862.Goodwin, pp. 478 480. The ensuing Union victory was among the bloodiest in American history, but it enabled Lincoln to announce that he would issue an Emancipation Proclamation in January. Having composed the Proclamation some time earlier, Lincoln had waited for a military victory to publish it to avoid it being perceived as the product of desperation.Goodwin, p. 481. McClellan then resisted the Presidents demand that he pursue Lees retreating and exposed army, while his counterpart General Don Carlos Buell likewise refused orders to move the Army of the Ohio against rebel forces in eastern Tennessee. As a result, Lincoln replaced Buell with William Rosecrans and, after the 1862 midterm elections, he replaced McClellan with Republican Ambrose Burnside. Both of these replacements were political moderates and prospectively more supportive of the CommanderinChief.Donald , pp. 389 390. Union soldiers before Maryes Heights, Fredericksburg, just prior to the battle of May 3, 1863 Burnside, against the advice of the president, prematurely launched an offensive across the Rappahannock River and was stunningly defeated by Lee at Fredericksburg in December. Not only had Burnside been defeated on the battlefield, but his soldiers were disgruntled and undisciplined. Desertions during 1863 were in the thousands and they increased after Fredericksburg.Donald , pp. 429 431. Lincoln brought in Joseph Hooker, despite his record of loose talk about the need for a military dictatorship.Nevins 6433 44 The midterm elections in 1862 brought the Republicans severe losses due to sharp disfavor with the administration over its failure to deliver a speedy end to the war, as well as rising inflation, new high taxes, rumors of corruption, the suspension of habeas corpus , the military draft law, and fears that freed slaves would undermine the labor market. The Emancipation Proclamation announced in September gained votes for the Republicans in the rural areas of New England and the upper Midwest, but it lost votes in the cities and the lower Midwest.Nevins vol 6 pp. 318 322, quote on p. 322. While Republicans were discouraged, Democrats were energized and did especially well in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, and New York. The Republicans did maintain their majorities in Congress and in the major states, except New York. The Cincinnati Gazette contended that the voters were depressed by the interminable nature of this war, as so far conducted, and by the rapid exhaustion of the national resources without progress. In the spring of 1863, Lincoln was optimistic about upcoming military campaigns to the point of thinking the end of the war could be near if a string of victories could be put together these plans included Hookers attack on Lee north of Richmond, Rosecrans on Chattanooga, Grants on Vicksburg, and a naval assault on Charleston.Donald , pp. 422 423. Hooker was routed by Lee at the Battle of Chancellorsville in May,Nevins 6432 450. but continued to command his troops for some weeks. He ignored Lincolns order to divide his troops, and possibly force Lee to do the same in Harpers Ferry, and tendered his resignation, which Lincoln accepted. He was replaced by George Meade, who followed Lee into Pennsylvania for the Gettysburg Campaign, which was a victory for the Union, though Lees army avoided capture. At the same time, after initial setbacks, Grant laid siege to Vicksburg and the Union navy attained some success in Charleston harbor.Donald , pp. 444 447. After the Battle of Gettysburg, Lincoln clearly understood that his military decisions would be more effectively carried out by conveying his orders through his War Secretary or his generalinchief on to his generals, who resented his civilian interference with their own plans. Even so, he often continued to give detailed directions to his generals as CommanderinChief.Donald , p. 446. Emancipation Proclamation altA darkhaired, bearded, middleaged man holding documents is seated among seven other men. Lincoln understood that the Federal governments power to end slavery was limited by the Constitution, which before 1865, committed the issue to individual states. He argued before and during his election that the eventual extinction of slavery would result from preventing its expansion into new U.S. territory. At the beginning of the war, he also sought to persuade the states to accept compensated emancipation in return for their prohibition of slavery. Lincoln believed that curtailing slavery in these ways would economically expunge it, as envisioned by the Founding Fathers, under the constitution. President Lincoln rejected two geographically limited emancipation attempts by Major General John C. Frmont in August 1861 and by Major General David Hunter in May 1862, on the grounds that it was not within their power, and it would upset the border states loyal to the Union.Guelzo , pp. 290 291. On June 19, 1862, endorsed by Lincoln, Congress passed an act banning slavery on all federal territory. In July, the Confiscation Act of 1862 was passed, which set up court procedures that could free the slaves of anyone convicted of aiding the rebellion. Although Lincoln believed it was not within Congresss power to free the slaves within the states, he approved the bill in deference to the legislature. He felt such action could only be taken by the CommanderinChief using war powers granted to the president by the Constitution, and Lincoln was planning to take that action. In that month, Lincoln discussed a draft of the Emancipation Proclamation with his cabinet. In it, he stated that as a fit and necessary military measure, on January 1, 1863, all persons held as slaves in the Confederate states will thenceforward, and forever, be free.Donald , pp. 364 365. Privately, Lincoln concluded at this point that the slave base of the Confederacy had to be eliminated. However, Copperheads argued that emancipation was a stumbling block to peace and reunification. Republican editor Horace Greeley of the highly influential New York Tribune fell for the ploy,McPherson , p. 124. and Lincoln refuted it directly in a shrewd letter of August 22, 1862. Although he said he personally wished all men could be free, Lincoln stated that the primary goal of his actions as the U.S. president was that of preserving the UnionGuelzo , pp. 147 153. The Emancipation Proclamation, issued on September 22, 1862, and put into effect on January 1, 1863, declared free the slaves in 10 states not then under Union control, with exemptions specified for areas already under Union control in two states.Donald , pp. 364, 379. Lincoln spent the next 100 days preparing the army and the nation for emancipation, while Democrats rallied their voters in the 1862 offyear elections by warning of the threat freed slaves posed to northern whites.Louis P. Masur, Lincolns Hundred Days The Emancipation Proclamation and the War for the Union Once the abolition of slavery in the rebel states became a military objective, as Union armies advanced south, more slaves were liberated until all three million of them in Confederate territory were freed. Lincolns comment on the signing of the Proclamation was I never, in my life, felt more certain that I was doing right, than I do in signing this paper.Donald , p. 407. For some time, Lincoln continued earlier plans to set up colonies for the newly freed slaves. He commented favorably on colonization in the Emancipation Proclamation, but all attempts at such a massive undertaking failed.Donald , p. 408. A few days after Emancipation was announced, 13 Republican governors met at the War Governors Conference they supported the presidents Proclamation, but suggested the removal of General George B. McClellan as commander of the Union Army.Nevins , pp. 2239 240. Enlisting former slaves in the military was official government policy after the issuance of the Emancipation Proclamation. By the spring of 1863, Lincoln was ready to recruit black troops in more than token numbers. In a letter to Andrew Johnson, the military governor of Tennessee, encouraging him to lead the way in raising black troops, Lincoln wrote, The bare sight of 50,000 armed and drilled black soldiers on the banks of the Mississippi would end the rebellion at once.Donald , pp. 430 431. By the end of 1863, at Lincolns direction, General Lorenzo Thomas had recruited 20 regiments of blacks from the Mississippi Valley.Donald , p. 431. Frederick Douglass once observed of Lincoln In his company, I was never reminded of my humble origin, or of my unpopular color.Douglass, pp. 259 260. Gettysburg Address The only confirmed photo of Abraham Lincoln at Gettysburg, some three hours before the speech With the great Union victory at the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863, and the defeat of the Copperheads in the Ohio election in the fall, Lincoln maintained a strong base of party support and was in a strong position to redefine the war effort, despite the New York City draft riots. The stage was set for his address at the Gettysburg battlefield cemetery on November 19, 1863.Donald , pp. 453 460. Defying Lincolns prediction that the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here, the Address became the most quoted speech in American history.Bulla , p. 222. In 272 words, and three minutes, Lincoln asserted the nation was born not in 1789, but in 1776, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. He defined the war as an effort dedicated to these principles of liberty and equality for all. The emancipation of slaves was now part of the national war effort. He declared that the deaths of so many brave soldiers would not be in vain, that slavery would end as a result of the losses, and the future of democracy in the world would be assured, that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth. Lincoln concluded that the Civil War had a profound objective a new birth of freedom in the nation.Donald , pp. 460 466.Wills, pp. 20, 27, 105, 146. General Grant President Lincoln with, from left, Generals Sherman and Grant and Admiral Porter in The Peacemakers , an 1868 painting of events aboard the River Queen in March 1865 Meades failure to capture Lees army as it retreated from Gettysburg, and the continued passivity of the Army of the Potomac, persuaded Lincoln that a change in command was needed. General Ulysses S. Grants victories at the Battle of Shiloh and in the Vicksburg campaign impressed Lincoln and made Grant a strong candidate to head the Union Army. Responding to criticism of Grant after Shiloh, Lincoln had said, I cant spare this man. He fights.Thomas , p. 315. With Grant in command, Lincoln felt the Union Army could relentlessly pursue a series of coordinated offensives in multiple theaters, and have a top commander who agreed on the use of black troops.Nevins, Ordeal of the Union , pp. 6 17. Nevertheless, Lincoln was concerned that Grant might be considering a candidacy for President in 1864, as McClellan was. Lincoln arranged for an intermediary to make inquiry into Grants political intentions, and being assured that he had none, submitted to the Senate Grants promotion to commander of the Union Army. He obtained Congresss consent to reinstate for Grant the rank of Lieutenant General, which no officer had held since George Washington.Donald , pp. 490 492. Grant waged his bloody Overland Campaign in 1864. This is often characterized as a war of attrition, given high Union losses at battles such as the Battle of the Wilderness and Cold Harbor. Even though they had the advantage of fighting on the defensive, the Confederate forces had almost as high a percentage of casualties as the Union forces.McPherson , p. 113. The high casualty figures of the Union alarmed the North Grant had lost a third of his army, and Lincoln asked what Grants plans were, to which the general replied, I propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer.Donald , p. 501. The Confederacy lacked reinforcements, so Lees army shrank with every costly battle. Grants army moved south, crossed the James River, forcing a siege and trench warfare outside Petersburg, Virginia. Lincoln then made an extended visit to Grants headquarters at City Point, Virginia. This allowed the president to confer in person with Grant and William Tecumseh Sherman about the hostilities, as Sherman coincidentally managed a hasty visit to Grant from his position in North Carolina. Lincoln and the Republican Party mobilized support for the draft throughout the North, and replaced the Union losses.Thomas , pp. 422 424. Lincoln authorized Grant to target the Confederate infrastructure such as plantations, railroads, and bridges hoping to destroy the Souths morale and weaken its economic ability to continue fighting. Grants move to Petersburg resulted in the obstruction of three railroads between Richmond and the South. This strategy allowed Generals Sherman and Philip Sheridan to destroy plantations and towns in Virginias Shenandoah Valley. The damage caused by Shermans March to the Sea through Georgia in 1864 was limited to a swath, but neither Lincoln nor his commanders saw destruction as the main goal, but rather defeat of the Confederate armies. Mark E. Neely Jr. has argued that there was no effort to engage in total war against civilians which he believed did take place during World War II.Neely , pp. 434 458. Confederate general Jubal Early began a series of assaults in the North that threatened the Capital. During Earlys raid on Washington, D.C. in 1864, Lincoln was watching the combat from an exposed position Captain Oliver Wendell Holmes shouted at him, Get down, you damn fool, before you get shotThomas , p. 434. After repeated calls on Grant to defend Washington, Sheridan was appointed and the threat from Early was dispatched.Donald , pp. 516 518. As Grant continued to wear down Lees forces, efforts to discuss peace began. Confederate Vice President Stephens led a group to meet with Lincoln, Seward, and others at Hampton Roads. Lincoln refused to allow any negotiation with the Confederacy as a coequal his sole objective was an agreement to end the fighting and the meetings produced no results.Donald , p. 565. On April 1, 1865, Grant successfully outflanked Lees forces in the Battle of Five Forks and nearly encircled Petersburg, and the Confederate government evacuated Richmond. Days later, when that city fell, Lincoln visited the vanquished Confederate capital as he walked through the city, white Southerners were stonefaced, but freedmen greeted him as a hero. On April 9, Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox and the war was effectively over.Donald , p. 589. 1864 reelection While the war was still being waged, Lincoln faced reelection in 1864. Lincoln was a master politician, bringing together and holding together all the main factions of the Republican Party, and bringing in War Democrats such as Edwin M. Stanton and Andrew Johnson as well. Lincoln spent many hours a week talking to politicians from across the land and using his patronage powers greatly expanded over peacetime to hold the factions of his party together, build support for his own policies, and fend off efforts by Radicals to drop him from the 1864 ticket.Fish, pp. 53 69.Tegeder, pp. 77 90. At its 1864 convention, the Republican Party selected Johnson, a War Democrat from the Southern state of Tennessee, as his running mate. To broaden his coalition to include War Democrats as well as Republicans, Lincoln ran under the label of the new Union Party.Donald , pp. 494 507. When Grants 1864 spring campaigns turned into bloody stalemates and Union casualties mounted, the lack of military success wore heavily on the Presidents reelection prospects, and many Republicans across the country feared that Lincoln would be defeated. Sharing this fear, Lincoln wrote and signed a pledge that, if he should lose the election, he would still defeat the Confederacy before turning over the White HouseGrimsley, p. 80. Lincoln did not show the pledge to his cabinet, but asked them to sign the sealed envelope. While the Democratic platform followed the Peace wing of the party and called the war a failure, their candidate, General George B. McClellan, supported the war and repudiated the platform. Lincoln provided Grant with more troops and mobilized his party to renew its support of Grant in the war effort. Shermans capture of Atlanta in September and David Farraguts capture of Mobile ended defeatist jittersDonald , p. 531. the Democratic Party was deeply split, with some leaders and most soldiers openly for Lincoln. By contrast, the National Union Party was united and energized as Lincoln made emancipation the central issue, and state Republican parties stressed the perfidy of the Copperheads.Randall Current , p. 307. On November 8, Lincoln was reelected in a landslide, carrying all but three states, and receiving 78 percent of the Union soldiers vote.Paludan, pp. 274 293. On March 4, 1865, Lincoln delivered his second inaugural address. In it, he deemed the high casualties on both sides to be Gods will. Historian Mark Noll concludes it ranks among the small handful of semisacred texts by which Americans conceive their place in the world.Noll, p. 426. Lincoln said Reconstruction Reconstruction began during the war, as Lincoln and his associates anticipated questions of how to reintegrate the conquered southern states, and how to determine the fates of Confederate leaders and freed slaves. Shortly after Lees surrender, a general had asked Lincoln how the defeated Confederates should be treated, and Lincoln replied, Let em up easy.Thomas , pp. 509 512. In keeping with that sentiment, Lincoln led the moderates regarding Reconstruction policy, and was opposed by the Radical Republicans, under Rep. Thaddeus Stevens, Sen. Charles Sumner and Sen. Benjamin Wade, political allies of the president on other issues. Determined to find a course that would reunite the nation and not alienate the South, Lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held throughout the war. His Amnesty Proclamation of December 8, 1863, offered pardons to those who had not held a Confederate civil office, had not mistreated Union prisoners, and would sign an oath of allegiance.Donald , pp. 471 472. A political cartoon of Vice President Andrew Johnson and Lincoln, 1865, entitled The Rail Splitter At Work Repairing the Union . The caption reads Take it quietly Uncle Abe and I will draw it closer than ever. A few more stitches Andy and the good old Union will be mended. As Southern states were subdued, critical decisions had to be made as to their leadership while their administrations were reformed. Of special importance were Tennessee and Arkansas, where Lincoln appointed Generals Andrew Johnson and Frederick Steele as military governors, respectively. In Louisiana, Lincoln ordered General Nathaniel P. Banks to promote a plan that would restore statehood when 10 percent of the voters agreed to it. Lincolns Democratic opponents seized on these appointments to accuse him of using the military to ensure his and the Republicans political aspirations. On the other hand, the Radicals denounced his policy as too lenient, and passed their own plan, the WadeDavis Bill, in 1864. When Lincoln vetoed the bill, the Radicals retaliated by refusing to seat representatives elected from Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee.Donald , pp. 485 486. Lincolns appointments were designed to keep both the moderate and Radical factions in harness. To fill Chief Justice Taneys seat on the Supreme Court, he named the choice of the Radicals, Salmon P. Chase, who Lincoln believed would uphold the emancipation and paper money policies.Nevins, Ordeal of the Union , Vol IV., p. 206. After implementing the Emancipation Proclamation, which did not apply to every state, Lincoln increased pressure on Congress to outlaw slavery throughout the entire nation with a constitutional amendment. Lincoln declared that such an amendment would clinch the whole matter.Donald , p. 561. By December 1863, a proposed constitutional amendment that would outlaw slavery was brought to Congress for passage. This first attempt at an amendment failed to pass, falling short of the required twothirds majority on June 15, 1864, in the House of Representatives. Passage of the proposed amendment became part of the RepublicanUnionist platform in the election of 1864. After a long debate in the House, a second attempt passed Congress on January 31, 1865, and was sent to the state legislatures for ratification.Donald , pp. 562 563. Upon ratification, it became the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution on December 6, 1865. As the war drew to a close, Lincolns presidential Reconstruction for the South was in flux having believed the federal government had limited responsibility to the millions of freedmen. He signed into law Senator Charles Sumners Freedmens Bureau bill that set up a temporary federal agency designed to meet the immediate material needs of former slaves. The law assigned land for a lease of three years with the ability to purchase title for the freedmen. Lincoln stated that his Louisiana plan did not apply to all states under Reconstruction. Shortly before his assassination, Lincoln announced he had a new plan for southern Reconstruction. Discussions with his cabinet revealed Lincoln planned shortterm military control over southern states, until readmission under the control of southern Unionists.Carwardine , pp. 242 243. Historians agree that it is impossible to predict exactly what Lincoln would have done about Reconstruction if he had lived, but they make projections based on his known policy positions and political acumen. Lincoln biographers James G. Randall and Richard Current, according to David Lincove, argue that It is likely that had he lived, Lincoln would have followed a policy similar to Johnsons, that he would have clashed with congressional Radicals, that he would have produced a better result for the freedmen than occurred, and that his political skills would have helped him avoid Johnsons mistakes. Eric Foner argues that Unlike Sumner and other Radicals, Lincoln did not see Reconstruction as an opportunity for a sweeping political and social revolution beyond emancipation. He had long made clear his opposition to the confiscation and redistribution of land. He believed, as most Republicans did in April 1865, that the voting requirements should be determined by the states. He assumed that political control in the South would pass to white Unionists, reluctant secessionists, and forwardlooking former Confederates. But time and again during the war, Lincoln, after initial opposition, had come to embrace positions first advanced by abolitionists and Radical Republicans.... Lincoln undoubtedly would have listened carefully to the outcry for further protection for the former slaves... It is entirely plausible to imagine Lincoln and Congress agreeing on a Reconstruction policy that encompassed federal protection for basic civil rights plus limited black suffrage, along the lines Lincoln proposed just before his death. Redefining the republic and republicanism Lincoln in February 1865, about two months before his death The successful reunification of the states had consequences for the name of the country. The term the United States has historically been used, sometimes in the plural , and other times in the singular, without any particular grammatical consistency. The Civil War was a significant force in the eventual dominance of the singular usage by the end of the 19th century. In recent years, historians such as Harry Jaffa, Herman Belz, John Diggins, Vernon Burton and Eric Foner have stressed Lincolns redefinition of republican values . As early as the 1850s, a time when most political rhetoric focused on the sanctity of the Constitution, Lincoln redirected emphasis to the Declaration of Independence as the foundation of American political values what he called the sheet anchor of republicanism.Jaffa, p. 399. The Declarations emphasis on freedom and equality for all, in contrast to the Constitutions tolerance of slavery, shifted the debate. As Diggins concludes regarding the highly influential Cooper Union speech of early 1860, Lincoln presented Americans a theory of history that offers a profound contribution to the theory and destiny of republicanism itself.Diggins, p. 307. His position gained strength because he highlighted the moral basis of republicanism, rather than its legalisms.Foner , p. 215. Nevertheless, in 1861, Lincoln justified the war in terms of legalisms , and then in terms of the national duty to guarantee a republican form of government in every state.Jaffa, p. 263. Burton argues that Lincolns republicanism was taken up by the Freedmen as they were emancipated.Orville Vernon Burton, The Age of Lincoln p 243 In March 1861, in Lincolns first inaugural address, he explored the nature of democracy. He denounced secession as anarchy, and explained that majority rule had to be balanced by constitutional restraints in the American system. He said A majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations, and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is the only true sovereign of a free people.Belz , p. 86. Other enactments Lincoln adhered to the Whig theory of the presidency, which gave Congress primary responsibility for writing the laws while the Executive enforced them. Lincoln vetoed only four bills passed by Congress the only important one was the WadeDavis Bill with its harsh program of Reconstruction.Donald , p. 137. He signed the Homestead Act in 1862, making millions of acres of governmentheld land in the West available for purchase at very low cost. The Morrill LandGrant Colleges Act, also signed in 1862, provided government grants for agricultural colleges in each state. The Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864 granted federal support for the construction of the United States First Transcontinental Railroad, which was completed in 1869.Paludan, p. 116. The passage of the Homestead Act and the Pacific Railway Acts was made possible by the absence of Southern congressmen and senators who had opposed the measures in the 1850s.McPherson , pp. 450 452. Other important legislation involved two measures to raise revenues for the Federal government tariffs , and a new Federal income tax. In 1861, Lincoln signed the second and third Morrill Tariff, the first having become law under James Buchanan. Also in 1861, Lincoln signed the Revenue Act of 1861, creating the first U.S. income tax.Donald , p. 424. This created a flat tax of 3 percent on incomes above 800 , which was later changed by the Revenue Act of 1862 to a progressive rate structure.Paludan, p. 111. Lincoln also presided over the expansion of the federal governments economic influence in several other areas. The creation of the system of national banks by the National Banking Act provided a strong financial network in the country. It also established a national currency. In 1862, Congress created, with Lincolns approval, the Department of Agriculture.Donald , p. 424. In 1862, Lincoln sent a senior general, John Pope, to put down the Sioux Uprising in Minnesota. Presented with 303 execution warrants for convicted Santee Dakota who were accused of killing innocent farmers, Lincoln conducted his own personal review of each of these warrants, eventually approving 39 for execution .Cox, p. 182. President Lincoln had planned to reform federal Indian policy.Nichols, pp. 210 232. In the wake of Grants casualties in his campaign against Lee, Lincoln had considered yet another executive call for a military draft, but it was never issued. In response to rumors of one, however, the editors of the New York World and the Journal of Commerce published a false draft proclamation which created an opportunity for the editors and others employed at the publications to corner the gold market. Lincolns reaction was to send the strongest of messages to the media about such behavior he ordered the military to seize the two papers. The seizure lasted for two days.Donald , pp. 501 502. Lincoln is largely responsible for the institution of the Thanksgiving holiday in the United States.Donald , p. 471. Before Lincolns presidency, Thanksgiving, while a regional holiday in New England since the 17th century, had been proclaimed by the federal government only sporadically and on irregular dates. The last such proclamation had been during James Madisons presidency 50 years before. In 1863, Lincoln declared the final Thursday in November of that year to be a day of Thanksgiving. In June 1864, Lincoln approved the Yosemite Grant enacted by Congress, which provided unprecedented federal protection for the area now known as Yosemite National Park. Judicial appointments Supreme Court appointments Noah Haynes Swayne 1862 Samuel Freeman Miller 1862 David Davis 1862 Stephen Johnson Field 1863 Salmon Portland Chase 1864 Salmon Portland Chase was Lincolns choice to be Chief Justice of the United States. Lincolns declared philosophy on court nominations was that we cannot ask a man what he will do, and if we should, and he should answer us, we should despise him for it. Therefore we must take a man whose opinions are known. Lincoln made five appointments to the United States Supreme Court. Noah Haynes Swayne, nominated January 21, 1862, and appointed January 24, 1862, was chosen as an antislavery lawyer who was committed to the Union. Samuel Freeman Miller, nominated and appointed on July 16, 1862, supported Lincoln in the 1860 election and was an avowed abolitionist. David Davis, Lincolns campaign manager in 1860, nominated December 1, 1862, and appointed December 8, 1862, had also served as a judge in Lincolns Illinois court circuit. Stephen Johnson Field, a previous California Supreme Court justice, was nominated March 6, 1863, and appointed March 10, 1863, and provided geographic balance, as well as political balance to the court as a Democrat. Finally, Lincolns Treasury Secretary, Salmon P. Chase, was nominated as Chief Justice, and appointed the same day, on December 6, 1864. Lincoln believed Chase was an able jurist, would support Reconstruction legislation, and that his appointment united the Republican Party.Blue, p. 245. Other judicial appointments Lincoln appointed 32 federal judges, including four Associate Justices and one Chief Justice to the Supreme Court of the United States, and 27 judges to the United States district courts. Lincoln appointed no judges to the United States circuit courts during his time in office. States admitted to the Union West Virginia, admitted to the Union June 20, 1863, contained the former northwesternmost counties of Virginia that seceded from Virginia after that commonwealth declared its secession from the Union. As a condition for its admission, West Virginias constitution was required to provide for the gradual abolition of slavery. Nevada, which became the third State in the farwest of the continent, was admitted as a free state on October 31, 1864.Donald , pp. 300, 539. Assassination and funeral Shown in the presidential booth of Fords Theatre, from left to right, are assassin John Wilkes Booth, Abraham Lincoln, Mary Todd Lincoln, Clara Harris, and Henry Rathbone Abraham Lincoln was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth on Good Friday, April 14, 1865, while attending a play at Fords Theatre as the American Civil War was drawing to a close. The assassination occurred five days after the surrender of Robert E. Lee and the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia. Booth was a wellknown actor and a Confederate spy from Maryland though he never joined the Confederate army, he had contacts with the Confederate secret service.Donald , pp. 586 587. In 1864, Booth formulated a plan Donald , p. 587. to kidnap Lincoln in exchange for the release of Confederate prisoners. After attending an April 11, 1865, speech in which Lincoln promoted voting rights for blacks, an incensed Booth changed his plans and became determined to assassinate the president.Harrison , pp. 3 4. Learning that the President and Grant would be attending Fords Theatre, Booth formulated a plan with coconspirators to assassinate Lincoln and Grant at the theater, as well as Vice President Johnson and Secretary of State Seward at their homes. Without his main bodyguard, Ward Hill Lamon, Lincoln left to attend the play Our American Cousin on April 14. At the last minute, Grant decided to go to New Jersey to visit his children instead of attending the play.Donald , pp. 594 597. Lincolns bodyguard, John Parker, left Fords Theater during intermission to drink at the saloon next door. The now unguarded President sat in his state box in the balcony. Seizing the opportunity, Booth crept up from behind and at about 1013pm, aimed at the back of Lincolns head and fired at pointblank range, mortally wounding the President. Major Henry Rathbone momentarily grappled with Booth, but Booth stabbed him and escaped.Donald , p. 597. After being on the run for 12 days, Booth was tracked down and found on a farm in Virginia, some south of Washington. After refusing to surrender to Union troops, Booth was killed by Sergeant Boston Corbett on April 26.Steers, p. 153.Donald , p. 599. Doctor Charles Leale, an Army surgeon, found the President unresponsive, barely breathing and with no detectable pulse. Having determined that the President had been shot in the head, and not stabbed in the shoulder as originally thought, he made an attempt to clear the blood clot, after which the President began to breathe more naturally. The dying President was taken across the street to Petersen House. After remaining in a coma for nine hours, Lincoln died at 722am on April 15. Secretary of War Stanton saluted and said, Now he belongs to the ages.Donald , pp. 598 599, 686. Witnesses have provided other versions of the quote, i.e. He now belongs to the ages. and He is a man for the ages. Lincolns flagenfolded body was then escorted in the rain to the White House by bareheaded Union officers, while the citys church bells rang. President Johnson was sworn in at 1000am, less than 3 hours after Lincolns death. The late President lay in state in the East Room, and then in the Capitol Rotunda from April 19 through April 21. For his final journey with his son Willie, both caskets were transported in the executive coach United States and for three weeks the Lincoln Special funeral train decorated in black bunting bore Lincolns remains on a slow circuitous waypoint journey from Washington D.C. to Springfield, Illinois, stopping at many cities across the North for largescale memorials attended by hundreds of thousands, as well as many people who gathered in informal trackside tributes with bands, bonfires, and hymn singingTrostel, pp. 31 58.Goodrich, pp. 231 238. or silent reverence with hat in hand as the railway procession slowly passed by. Poet Walt Whitman composed When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloomd to eulogize Lincoln, one of four poems he wrote about the assassinated president. Historians have emphasized the widespread shock and sorrow, but also noted that some Lincoln haters cheered when they heard the news. AfricanAmericans were especially moved they had lost their Moses. In a larger sense, the outpouring of grief and anguish was in response to the deaths of so many men in the war that had just ended. Religious and philosophical beliefs Abraham Lincoln , painting by George Peter Alexander Healy in 1869 As a young man, Lincoln was a religious skeptic, or, in the words of a biographer, an iconoclast.Carwardine , p. 4. Later in life, Lincolns frequent use of religious imagery and language might have reflected his own personal beliefs or might have been a device to appeal to his audiences, who were mostly evangelical Protestants.Carwardine , pp. 27 55. He never joined a church, although he frequently attended with his wife.On claims that Lincoln was baptized by an associate of Alexander Campbell, see However, he was deeply familiar with the Bible, and he both quoted and praised it.Donald , pp. 48 49, 514 515. He was private about his beliefs and respected the beliefs of others. Lincoln never made a clear profession of Christian beliefs. However, he did believe in an allpowerful God that shaped events and, by 1865, was expressing those beliefs in major speeches. In the 1840s, Lincoln subscribed to the Doctrine of Necessity, a belief that asserted the human mind was controlled by some higher power.Donald , pp. 48 49. In the 1850s, Lincoln believed in providence in a general way, and rarely used the language or imagery of the evangelicals he regarded the republicanism of the Founding Fathers with an almost religious reverence.Grant R. Brodrecht, Our country Northern evangelicals and the Union during the Civil War and Reconstruction p. 40 When he suffered the death of his son Edward, Lincoln more frequently expressed a need to depend on God.Parrillo, pp. 227 253. The death of his son Willie in February 1862 may have caused Lincoln to look toward religion for answers and solace.Wilson, pp. 251 254. After Willies death, Lincoln considered why, from a divine standpoint, the severity of the war was necessary. He wrote at this time that God could have either saved or destroyed the Union without a human contest. Yet the contest began. And having begun He could give the final victory to either side any day. Yet the contest proceeds.Wilson, p. 254. On the day Lincoln was assassinated, he reportedly told his wife he desired to visit the Holy Land.Guelzo , p. 434 Health Several claims abound that Lincolns health was declining before the assassination. These are often based on photographs appearing to show weight loss and muscle wasting. One such claim is that he suffered from a rare genetic disorder, MEN2b, which manifests with a medullary thyroid carcinoma, mucosal neuromas and a Marfanoid appearance. Others simply claim he had Marfan syndrome, based on his tall appearance with spindly fingers, and the association of possible aortic regurgitation, which can cause bobbing of the head based on blurring of Lincolns head in photographs, which back then had a long exposure time. , DNA analysis was being refused by the Grand Army of the Republic museum in Philadelphia. Historical reputation Lincolns image is carved into the stone of Mount Rushmore. In surveys of U.S. scholars ranking presidents conducted since the 1940s, Lincoln is consistently ranked in the top three, often as number one. A 2004 study found that scholars in the fields of history and politics ranked Lincoln number one, while legal scholars placed him second after Washington.Taranto, p. 264. In presidential ranking polls conducted in the United States since 1948, Lincoln has been rated at the very top in the majority of polls. Generally, the top three presidents are rated as 1. Lincoln 2. George Washington and 3. Franklin D. Roosevelt, although Lincoln and Washington, and Washington and Roosevelt, are occasionally reversed.Densen, John V., editor, Reassessing The Presidency, The Rise of the Executive State and the Decline of Freedom , pgs. 1 32 Ridings, William H., Stuard B. McIver, Rating The presidents, A Ranking of U.S. Leaders, From the Great and Honorable to the Dishonest and Incompetent . President Lincolns assassination increased his status to the point of making him a national martyr. Lincoln was viewed by abolitionists as a champion for human liberty. Republicans linked Lincolns name to their party. Many, though not all, in the South considered Lincoln as a man of outstanding ability.Chesebrough, pp. 76, 79, 106, 110. Historians have said he was a classical liberal in the 19th century sense. Allen C. Guelzo states that Lincoln was a classical liberal democrat an enemy of artificial hierarchy, a friend to trade and business as ennobling and enabling, and an American counterpart to Mill, Cobden, and Bright .See also James G. Randall, Lincoln the Liberal Statesman . Lincoln became a favorite exemplar for liberal intellectuals across Europe and Latin America and even in Asia. Schwartz argues that Lincolns American reputation grew slowly in the late 19th century until the Progressive Era when he emerged as one of the most venerated heroes in American history, with even white Southerners in agreement. The high point came in 1922 with the dedication of the Lincoln Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.Schwartz , p. 109. In the New Deal era liberals honored Lincoln not so much as the selfmade man or the great war president, but as the advocate of the common man who they believe would have supported the welfare state. In the Cold War years, Lincolns image shifted to emphasize the symbol of freedom who brought hope to those oppressed by communist regimes.Schwartz , pp. 23, 91 98. By the 1970s Lincoln had become a hero to political conservativesHavers, p. 96. Apart from neoConfederates such as Mel Bradford who denounced his treatment of the white South. for his intense nationalism, support for business, his insistence on stopping the spread of human bondage, his acting in terms of Lockean and Burkean principles on behalf of both liberty and tradition, and his devotion to the principles of the Founding Fathers.Belz , pp. 514 518.Graebner, pp. 67 94.Smith, pp. 43 45. As a Whig activist, Lincoln was a spokesman for business interests, favoring high tariffs, banks, internal improvements, and railroads in opposition to the agrarian Democrats.Boritt , pp. 196, 198, 228, 301. William C. Harris found that Lincolns reverence for the Founding Fathers, the Constitution, the laws under it, and the preservation of the Republic and its institutions undergirded and strengthened his conservatism.Harris, p. 2. James G. Randall emphasizes his tolerance and especially his moderation in his preference for orderly progress, his distrust of dangerous agitation, and his reluctance toward ill digested schemes of reform. Randall concludes that, he was conservative in his complete avoidance of that type of socalled radicalism which involved abuse of the South, hatred for the slaveholder, thirst for vengeance, partisan plotting, and ungenerous demands that Southern institutions be transformed overnight by outsiders.Randall , p. 175. By the late 1960s, some African American intellectuals led by Lerone Bennett Jr., rejected Lincolns role as the Great Emancipator.Zilversmit, Lincoln and the Problem of Race A Decade of Interpretations pp. 22 24.John M. Barr, Holding Up a Flawed Mirror to the American Soul Abraham Lincoln in the Writings of Lerone Bennett Jr., Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association 35 , 43 65 Bennett won wide attention when he called Lincoln a white supremacist in 1968.Bennett, pp. 35 42. He noted that Lincoln used ethnic slurs and told jokes that ridiculed blacks. Bennett argued that Lincoln opposed social equality, and proposed sending freed slaves to another country. Defenders, such as authors Dirck and Cashin, retorted that he was not as bad as most politicians of his dayDirck , p. 31. and that he was a moral visionary who deftly advanced the abolitionist cause, as fast as politically possible.Striner, pp. 2 4. The emphasis shifted away from Lincolntheemancipator to an argument that blacks had freed themselves from slavery, or at least were responsible for pressuring the government on emancipation.Cashin, p. 61.Kelley Lewis, p. 228. Historian Barry Schwartz wrote in 2009 that Lincolns image suffered erosion, fading prestige, benign ridicule in the late 20th century.Schwartz , p. 146. On the other hand, Donald opined in his 1996 biography that Lincoln was distinctly endowed with the personality trait of negative capability, defined by the poet John Keats and attributed to extraordinary leaders who were content in the midst of uncertainties and doubts, and not compelled toward fact or reason.Donald , p. 15. In the 21st century, President Barack Obama named Lincoln his favorite president and insisted on using Lincolns Bible for his swearing in to office at both his inaugurations. Lincoln has often been portrayed by Hollywood, almost always in a flattering light.Steven Spielberg, Doris Kearns Goodwin, and Tony Kushner, Mr. Lincoln Goes to Hollywood, Smithsonian 437 pp. 46 53.Melvyn Stokes, Abraham Lincoln and the Movies, American Nineteenth Century History 12 , 203 31. The Union nationalism as envisioned by Lincoln, helped lead America to the nationalism of Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, and Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Memory and memorials Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C. Lincolns portrait appears on two denominations of United States currency, the penny and the 5 bill. His likeness also appears on many postage stamps and he has been memorialized in many town, city, and county names,Dennis, p. 194. including the capital of Nebraska. While he is usually portrayed bearded, he first grew a beard in 1860 at the suggestion of 11yearold Grace Bedell. The most famous and most visited memorials are Lincolns sculpture on Mount Rushmore Lincoln Memorial, Fords Theatre, and Petersen House in Washington, D.C. and the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum in Springfield, Illinois, not far from Lincolns home, as well as his tomb. There was also the Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln exhibit in Disneyland, and the Hall of presidents at Walt Disney World, which had to do with Walt Disney admiring Lincoln ever since he was a little boy. Barry Schwartz, a sociologist who has examined Americas cultural memory, argues that in the 1930s and 1940s, the memory of Abraham Lincoln was practically sacred and provided the nation with a moral symbol inspiring and guiding American life. During the Great Depression, he argues, Lincoln served as a means for seeing the worlds disappointments, for making its sufferings not so much explicable as meaningful. Franklin D. Roosevelt, preparing America for war, used the words of the Civil War president to clarify the threat posed by Germany and Japan. Americans asked, What would Lincoln doBarry Schwartz, Abraham Lincoln in the PostHeroic Era History and Memory in Late TwentiethCentury America pp. xi, 9, 24 However, Schwartz also finds that since World War II, Lincolns symbolic power has lost relevance, and this fading hero is symptomatic of fading confidence in national greatness. He suggested that postmodernism and multiculturalism have diluted greatness as a concept.Barry Schwartz, Abraham Lincoln in the PostHeroic Era History and Memory in Late TwentiethCentury America p. xi, 9 The United States Navy is named after Lincoln, the second Navy ship to bear his name. See also Outline of Abraham Lincoln Sexuality of Abraham Lincoln Dakota War of 1862 Grace Bedell Lincoln Tower List of photographs of Abraham Lincoln List of civil rights leaders References Bibliography Cited in footnotes online online McClintock, Russell . Lincoln and the Decision for War The Northern Response to Secession . The University of North Carolina Press. . Online preview. , also published as vol 3 4 of Ordeal of the Union also published as vol 5 8 of Ordeal of the Union online Historiography Barr, John M. Holding Up a Flawed Mirror to the American Soul Abraham Lincoln in the Writings of Lerone Bennett Jr., Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association 35 , 43 65. Barr, John M. Loathing Lincoln An American Tradition from the Civil War to the Present . Holzer, Harold and Craig L. Symonds, eds. Exploring Lincoln Great Historians Reappraise Our Greatest President , essays by 16 scholars Manning, Chandra, The Shifting Terrain of Attitudes toward Abraham Lincoln and Emancipation, Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association , 34 , 18 39. Smith, Adam I.P. The Cult of Abraham Lincoln and the Strange Survival of Liberal England in the Era of the World Wars, Twentieth Century British History , 214 pp.486 509 Spielberg, Steven Goodwin, Doris Kearns Kushner, Tony. Mr. Lincoln Goes to Hollywood, Smithsonian 437 pp.46 53. Additional references Green, Michael S. Lincoln and the Election of 1860 excerpt and text search , vol 3. of detailed biography Peraino, Kevin. Lincoln in the World The Making of a Statesman and the Dawn of American Power . White, Ronald C. A. Lincoln A Biography . External links Official Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum White House biography Organizations Abraham Lincoln Association Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Foundation Media coverage Other Abraham Lincoln A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Life Portrait of Abraham Lincoln, from CSPANs American presidents Life Portraits , June 28, 1999 Writings of Abraham Lincoln from CSPANs American Writers A Journey Through History Abraham Lincoln Original Letters and Manuscripts Shapell Manuscript Foundation LincolnNet Abraham Lincoln Historical Digitization Project Northern Illinois University Libraries Teaching Abraham Lincoln National Endowment for the Humanities In Popular SongOur Noble Chief Has Passed Away by CooperThomas Category1809 births Category1865 deaths Category19thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican postmasters CategoryAmerican surveyors CategoryAssassinated heads of state CategoryAssassinated Presidents of the United States CategoryBurials at Oak Ridge Cemetery CategoryDeaths by firearm in Washington, D.C. CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryIllinois Central Railroad people CategoryIllinois lawyers CategoryIllinois Republicans CategoryIllinois Whigs Abraham CategoryMembers of the Illinois House of Representatives CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Illinois CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law CategoryPeople associated with the assassination of Abraham Lincoln CategoryPeople from Coles County, Illinois CategoryPeople from LaRue County, Kentucky CategoryPeople from Macon County, Illinois CategoryPeople from Spencer County, Indiana CategoryPeople murdered in Washington, D.C. CategoryPeople of Illinois in the American Civil War CategoryPeople with mood disorders CategoryPolitical party founders CategoryPoliticians from Springfield, Illinois CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategorySmallpox survivors CategoryUnion political leaders CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1860 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1864 CategoryWhig Party members of the United States House ofRepresentatives
Andrew Jackson was an American soldier and statesman who served as the seventh President of the United States from 1829 to 1837. Before being elected to the presidency, Jackson gained fame as a general in the United States Army and served in both houses of Congress. As president, Jackson sought to advance the rights of the common man against a corrupt aristocracy and to preserve the Union. Born in the Waxhaws, Jackson became a lawyer in the Western District of North Carolina and married Rachel Donelson Robards. He served briefly in the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate representing Tennessee. After resigning, he was appointed a justice on the Tennessee Supreme Court, serving from 1798 until 1804. Jackson purchased a property that became known as the Hermitage, and became a wealthy, slaveowning planter. In 1801, he was appointed colonel of the Tennessee militia and was elected its commander the following year. He led troops during the Creek War of 1813 1814, winning a major victory at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. The subsequent Treaty of Fort Jackson required the Creek surrender of vast lands in presentday Alabama and Georgia. Jackson won a decisive victory in the War of 1812 over the British at the Battle of New Orleans, making him a national hero. After the war, Jackson led U.S. forces in the First Seminole War, which caused the annexation of Florida from Spain. Jackson briefly served as Floridas first territorial governor before winning election as a U.S. Senator from Tennessee. Jackson ran for president in 1824, winning a plurality of the popular and electoral vote. As no candidate won an electoral majority, the House of Representatives elected John Quincy Adams in a contingent election. In reaction to the alleged corrupt bargain between Adams and Henry Clay and the ambitious agenda of President Adams, Jacksons supporters founded the Democratic Party. Jackson ran again in 1828, defeating Adams in a landslide. Jackson faced the threat of secession by South Carolina over the Tariff of Abominations. The crisis was defused when the tariff was amended, and Jackson threatened the use of military force if South Carolina attempted to secede. Congress, led by Clay, tried to reauthorize the Second Bank of the United States Jackson regarded the Bank as a corrupt institution and vetoed the renewal of its charter. After a lengthy struggle, Jackson and his allies thoroughly dismantled the Bank. In 1835, Jackson became the only president to completely pay off the national debt, fulfilling a longtime goal. His presidency marked the beginning of the ascendancy of the spoils system in American politics. In 1830, Jackson signed the Indian Removal Act, which relocated most members of the Native American tribes in the South to Indian Territory. The relocation process dispossessed the Indians and resulted in widespread death and sickness. In foreign affairs, Jacksons administration concluded a most favored nation treaty with Great Britain, settled claims of damages against France from the Napoleonic Wars, and recognized the Republic of Texas. He vehemently opposed the rising trend of abolitionism. In his retirement, Jackson remained active in Democratic Party politics, supporting the presidencies of Martin Van Buren and James K. Polk. Though fearful of its effects on the slavery debate, Jackson advocated the annexation of Texas, which was accomplished shortly before his death. Jackson was widely revered in the United States as an advocate for the causes of democracy and the common man, but his reputation has declined since the civil rights movement, largely due to his role in Indian removal and support for slavery. Surveys of historians and scholars have ranked Jackson between 6th and 18th most successful among United States presidents. Early life and education Andrew Jackson was born on March 15, 1767, in the Waxhaws region of the Carolinas. His parents were ScotsIrish colonists Andrew and Elizabeth Hutchinson Jackson, Presbyterians who had emigrated from present day Northern Ireland two years earlier. Jacksons father was born in Carrickfergus, County Antrim, in currentday Northern Ireland, around 1738. Jacksons parents lived in the village of Boneybefore, also in County Antrim. His paternal family line originated in Killingswold Grove, Yorkshire, England. When they immigrated to North America in 1765, Jacksons parents probably landed in Philadelphia. Most likely they traveled overland through the Appalachian Mountains to the ScotsIrish community in the Waxhaws region, straddling the border between North and South Carolina. They brought two children from Ireland, Hugh and Robert . Jacksons father died in an accident in February 1767 at the age of 29, three weeks before his son Andrew was born. Jackson, his mother, and his brothers lived with Jacksons aunt and uncle in the Waxhaws region, and Jackson received schooling from two nearby priests. Jacksons exact birthplace is unclear because he was born about the time his mother was making a difficult trip home from burying Jacksons father. The area was so remote that the border between North and South Carolina had not been officially surveyed. In 1824 Jackson wrote a letter saying that he was born at an uncles plantation in Lancaster County, South Carolina. Jackson may have claimed to be a South Carolinian because the state was considering nullification of the Tariff of 1824, which he opposed. In the mid1850s, secondhand evidence indicated that he might have been born at a different uncles home in North Carolina. Revolutionary War service Young Jackson Refusing to Clean Major Coffins Boots During the Revolutionary War, Jacksons eldest brother, Hugh, died from heat exhaustion after the Battle of Stono Ferry on June 20, 1779. AntiBritish sentiment intensified following the brutal Waxhaws Massacre on May 29, 1780. Jacksons mother encouraged him and his elder brother Robert to attend the local militia drills. Soon, they began to help the militia as couriers. They served under Colonel William Richardson Davie at the Battle of Hanging Rock on August 6. Andrew and Robert were eventually captured by the British in 1781 while staying at the home of the Crawford family. When Andrew refused to clean the boots of a British officer, the officer slashed at the youth with a sword, leaving him with scars on his left hand and head, as well as an intense hatred for the British. Robert also refused to do as commanded and was struck with the sword. The two brothers were held as prisoners, contracted smallpox, and nearly starved to death in captivity. After a time, their mother Elizabeth secured the brothers release. She then began to walk both boys back to their home in the Waxhaws. Robert Jackson died on the way a few days later on April 27, 1781. After nursing Andrew back to health, Elizabeth volunteered to nurse prisoners of war on board two ships in the Charleston harbor, where there had been an outbreak of cholera. In November she died from the disease and was buried in an unmarked grave. Andrew became an orphan at age 14. He blamed the British personally for the loss of his brothers and mother. Early career Legal career and marriage After the Revolutionary War, Jackson received a sporadic education in a local Waxhaw school. In 1781 he worked for a time in a saddlemakers shop. On bad terms with much of his extended family, he boarded with several different people while teaching school or working for the saddlemaker. In 1784, he left the Waxhaws region for Salisbury, North Carolina, where he studied law under attorney Spruce Macay. With the help of various lawyers, he was able to learn enough to qualify for the bar. In September 1787, Jackson was admitted to the North Carolina bar. Shortly thereafter, a friend helped Jackson get appointed to a vacant prosecutor position in the Western District of North Carolina, which would later become the state of Tennessee. During his travel west, Jackson bought his first slave and in 1788, having been offended by fellow lawyer Waightstill Avery, fought his first duel. The duel ended with both men firing into the air, having made a secret agreement to do so before the engagement. Jackson moved to the frontier town of Nashville in 1788, where he lived as a boarder with Rachel Stockly Donelson, the widow of John Donelson. Here Jackson became acquainted with their daughter, Rachel Donelson Robards. At the time, the younger Rachel was in an unhappy marriage with Captain Lewis Robards he was subject to fits of jealous rage. The two were separated in 1790. According to Jackson, he married Rachel after hearing that Robards had obtained a divorce. However, the divorce had never been completed, making Rachels marriage to Jackson bigamous and therefore invalid. After the divorce was officially completed, Rachel and Jackson remarried in 1794. To complicate matters further, evidence shows that Rachel had been living with Jackson and referred to herself as Mrs. Jackson before the petition for divorce was ever made. It was not uncommon on the frontier for relationships to be formed and dissolved unofficially, as long as they were recognized by the community. Land speculation and founding of Memphis In 1794, Jackson formed a business with fellow lawyer and planter John Overton, overtly buying and selling land which had been reserved by treaty for the Cherokee and Chickasaw.Walter T. Durham, Before Tennessee The Southwest Territory Piney Flats, TN Rocky Mount Historical Association, 1990 pp. 218 19. Theirs was a frank avowal they, like many of their contemporaries, would deal with lands within Indian territory. Most of the transactions involved grants made under the land grab act of 1783 that briefly opened to claim by North Carolinians all of the Indian lands in that states transmontane west. He was one of the three original investors who founded Memphis, Tennessee, in 1819. Early political career and Tennessee militia After moving to Nashville, Jackson became a protege of William Blount, a friend of the Donelsons and one of the most powerful men in the state. Jackson became attorney general in 1791, and he won election as a delegate to the Tennessee constitutional convention in 1796. When Tennessee achieved statehood that year, he was elected its only U.S. Representative. The following year, the state legislature elected him as U.S. Senator. He resigned within a year. While in Philadelphia, then the nations capital, Jackson aligned himself with the DemocraticRepublican Party, and he strongly opposed the Jay Treaty. In 1798, with strong support from western Tennessee, he was elected to serve as a judge of the Tennessee Supreme Court, at an annual salary of 600. Jacksons service as a judge is generally viewed as a success and earned him a reputation for honesty and good decision making. Jackson resigned the judgeship in 1804 and returned fulltime to his business interests. His official reason for resigning was ill health. He had been suffering financially from poor land ventures, and so it is also possible that he wanted to return fulltime to his business interests. After arriving in Tennessee, Jackson won the appointment of judge advocate of the Tennessee militia. While serving on the Tennessee Supreme Court, he was appointed in 1801 as a colonel in the Tennessee militia. In 1802 he declared his candidacy for major general, or commander, of the Tennessee militia, a position voted on by the officers. Jackson, with strong support from western Tennessee, tied with John Sevier with seventeen votes. Sevier was a popular Revolutionary War veteran and former governor, the recognized leader of politics in eastern Tennessee. On February 5, Governor Archibald Roane broke the tie in Jacksons favor. Jackson had also presented Roane with evidence against Sevier of land fraud. Subsequently, in 1803, when Sevier announced his intention to regain the governorship, Roane released the evidence. Sevier responded with hostility to Jackson, and the two nearly fought a duel over the matter. Despite the charges leveled against Sevier, he defeated Roane, and continued to serve as governor until 1809. Sevier took revenge on Jackson by dividing the militia into east and west districts, and giving Jackson control of only the west. Planting career and controversy Notice of reward offered by Jackson for return of an enslaved man In addition to his legal and political career, Jackson prospered as planter, slave owner, and merchant. He built a home and the first general store in Gallatin, Tennessee, in 1803. The next year, he acquired the Hermitage, a plantation in Davidson County, near Nashville. He later added to the plantation, which eventually totaled . The primary crop was cotton, grown by slaves Jackson began with nine, owned as many as 44 by 1820, and later up to 150, making him among the planter elite. Jackson also coowned with his son Andrew Jackson Jr. the Halcyon plantation in Coahoma County, Mississippi, which housed 51 slaves at the time of his death. Throughout his lifetime Jackson may have owned as many as 300 slaves.Remini , p. 51, cites 1820 census mentions later figures up to 150 without noting a source. Men, women, and child slaves were owned by Jackson on three sections of the Hermitage plantation. Slaves lived in extended family units of between five and ten persons and were quartered in cabins made either of brick or logs. The size and quality of the Hermitage slave quarters exceeded the standards of his times. To help slaves acquire food, Jackson supplied them with guns, knives, and fishing equipment. At times he paid his slaves with monies and coins to trade in local markets. The Hermitage plantation was a profitmaking enterprise. Jackson permitted slaves to be whipped to increase productivity or if he believed his slaves offenses were severe enough. At various times he posted advertisements for fugitive slaves who had escaped from his plantation. For the standards of his times, Jackson was considered a humane slave owner who furnished his slaves food and housing, and he did not prohibit his female slaves from having children. The controversy surrounding his marriage to Rachel remained a sore point for Jackson, who deeply resented attacks on his wifes honor. By May 1806, Charles Dickinson, who, like Jackson, raced horses, had published an attack on Jackson in the local newspaper, and it resulted in a written challenge from Jackson to a duel. Since Dickinson was considered an expert shot, Jackson determined it would be best to let Dickinson turn and fire first, hoping that his aim might be spoiled in his quickness Jackson would wait and take careful aim at Dickinson. Dickinson did fire first, hitting Jackson in the chest. The bullet that struck Jackson was so close to his heart that it could not be removed. Under the rules of dueling, Dickinson had to remain still as Jackson took aim and shot and killed him. Jacksons behavior in the duel outraged men in Tennessee, who called it a brutal, coldblooded killing and saddled Jackson with a reputation as a violent, vengeful man. He became a social outcast. After the Sevier affair and the duel, Jackson was looking for a way to salvage his reputation. He chose to align himself with former Vice President Aaron Burr, who after leaving office in 1805 went on a tour of the western United States. During that time he stayed for several days at the Hermitage. Burrs true intentions are not known with certainty. He seems to have been planning a military operation to conquer Spanish Florida and drive the Spanish from Texas. To many westerners like Jackson, the promise seemed enticing. Western American settlers had long held bitter feelings towards the Spanish due to territorial disputes and the persistent failure of the Spanish to keep Indians living on their lands from raiding American settlements. On October 4, 1806, Jackson addressed the Tennessee militia, declaring that the men should be at a moments warning ready to march. On the same day, he wrote to James Winchester, proclaiming that the United States can conquer not only the Floridas, but all Spanish North America. He continued Jackson agreed to provide boats and other provisions for the expedition. However, on November 10, he learned from a military captain that Burrs plans apparently included seizure of New Orleans, then part of the Louisiana Territory of the United States, and incorporating it, along with lands won from the Spanish, into a new empire. He was further outraged when he learned from the same man of the involvement of Brigadier General James Wilkinson, whom he deeply disliked, in the plan. Jackson acted cautiously at first, but wrote letters to public officials, including President Thomas Jefferson, vaguely warning them about the scheme. In December, Jefferson, a political opponent of Burr, issued a proclamation declaring that a treasonous plot was underway in the West and calling for the arrest of the perpetrators. Jackson, safe from arrest because of his extensive paper trail, organized the militia. Burr was soon captured, and the men were sent home. Jackson traveled to Richmond, Virginia, to testify on Burrs behalf in trial. The defense team decided against placing him on the witness stand, fearing his remarks were too provocative. Burr was acquitted of treason, despite Jeffersons efforts to have him convicted. Jackson endorsed James Monroe for President in 1808 against James Madison. The latter was part of the Jeffersonian wing of the DemocraticRepublican Party. Military career War of 1812 Creek campaign and treaty Portrait by Ralph E. W. Earl, c. 1837 Leading up to 1812, the United States found itself increasingly drawn into international conflict. Formal hostilities with Spain or France never materialized, but tensions with Britain increased for a number of reasons. Among these was the desire of many Americans for more land, particularly British Canada and Florida, the latter still controlled by Spain, Britains European ally. On June 18, 1812, Congress officially declared war on the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, beginning the War of 1812. Jackson responded enthusiastically, sending a letter to Washington offering 2,500 volunteers. However, the men were not called up for many months. Biographer Robert V. Remini claims that Jackson saw the apparent slight as payback by the Madison administration for his support of Burr and Monroe. Meanwhile, the United States military repeatedly suffered devastating defeats on the battlefield. On January 10, 1813, Jackson led an army of 2,071 volunteers to New Orleans to defend the region against British and Native American attacks. He was to serve under General Wilkinson, who commanded Federal forces in New Orleans. Lacking adequate provisions, Wilkinson ordered Jackson to halt in Natchez, now part of the Mississippi Territory, and await further orders. Jackson reluctantly obeyed. The newly appointed Secretary of War, John Armstrong Jr., sent a letter to Jackson dated February 6 ordering him dismiss his forces and to turn over his supplies to Wilkinson. In reply to Armstrong on March 15, Jackson defended the character and readiness of his men, and promised to turn over his supplies. However, he also promised to, instead of dismissing the troops without provisions in Natchez, march them back to Nashville. The march was filled with agony. Many of the men had fallen ill. Jackson and his officers turned over their horses to the sick. He paid for provisions for the men out of his own pocket. The soldiers began referring to their commander as Hickory because of his toughness, and Jackson became known as Old Hickory. The army arrived in Nashville within about a month. Jacksons actions earned him the widespread respect and praise of the people of Tennessee. On June 14, Jackson served as a second in a duel on behalf of his junior officer William Carroll against Jesse Benton. In September, Jackson and his top cavalry officer, Brigadier General John Coffee, were involved in a street brawl with Jesse and his brother, Thomas. Jackson was severely wounded by Jesse with a gunshot to the shoulder. On August 30, 1813, a group of Muscogee called the Red Sticks, so named for the color of their war paint, perpetrated the Fort Mims massacre. The Red Sticks, led by chiefs Red Eagle and Peter McQueen, had broken away from the rest of the Creek Confederacy, which wanted peace with the United States. They were allied with Tecumseh, a Shawnee chief who had launched Tecumsehs War against the United States, and who was fighting alongside the British. During the massacre, hundreds of white American settlers and nonRed Stick Creeks were slaughtered. The resulting conflict became known as the Creek War. In the Treaty of Fort Jackson, the Muscogee surrendered large parts of presentday Alabama and Georgia. Jackson, with 2,500 men, was ordered to crush the hostile Indians. On October 10, he set out on the expedition, his arm still in a sling. Jackson established Fort Strother as a supply base. On November 3, Coffee defeated a band of Red Sticks at the Battle of Tallushatchee. Coming to the relief of friendly Creeks besieged by Red Sticks, Jackson won another decisive victory at the Battle of Talladega. In the winter, Jackson, encamped at Fort Strother, faced a severe shortage of troops due to the expiration of enlistments and chronic desertions. He sent Coffee with the cavalry back to Tennessee to secure more enlistments. Jackson decided to combine his force with that of the Georgia militia, and marched to meet the Georgia troops. From January 22 24, 1814, while on their way, the Tennessee militia and allied Muscogee were attacked by the Red Sticks at the Battles of Emuckfaw and Enotachopo Creek. Jacksons troops repelled the attackers, but outnumbered, were forced to withdraw to Fort Strother. Jackson, now with over 2,000 troops, marched most of his army south to confront the Red Sticks at a fortress they had constructed at a bend in the Tallapoosa River. On March 27, enjoying an advantage of more than 2 to 1, he engaged them at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. An initial artillery barrage did little damage to the wellconstructed fort. However, a subsequent Infantry charge, in addition to an assault by Coffees cavalry and diversions caused by the friendly Creeks, overwhelmed the Red Sticks. The campaign ended three weeks later with Red Eagles surrender, although some Red Sticks such as McQueen fled to East Florida. On June 8, Jackson accepted a commission as brigadier general in the United States Army, and 10 days later became a major general, in command of the Seventh Military Division. Subsequently, Jackson, with Madisons approval, imposed the Treaty of Fort Jackson. The treaty required the Muscogee, including those who had not joined the Red Sticks, to surrender 23 million acres of land to the United States. Though in illhealth from dysentery, Jackson turned his attention to defeating Spanish and British forces. Jackson accused the Spanish of arming the Red Sticks and of violating the terms of their neutrality by allowing British soldiers into the Floridas. The first charge was true, while the second ignored the fact that it was Jacksons threats to invade Florida which had caused them to seek British protection. In the November 7 Battle of Pensacola, Jackson defeated British and Spanish forces in a short skirmish. The Spanish surrendered and the British fled. Weeks later, he learned that the British were planning an attack on New Orleans, which sat on the mouth of the Mississippi River and held immense strategic and commercial value. Jackson abandoned Pensacola to the Spanish, placed a force in Mobile, Alabama to guard against a possible invasion there, and rushed the rest of his force west to defend the city. The Creeks coined their own name for Jackson, Jacksa Chula Harjo or Jackson, old and fierce. Battle of New Orleans The Battle of New Orleans . General Andrew Jackson stands on the parapet of his defenses as his troops repulse attacking Highlanders, by painter Edward Percy Moran in 1910. After arriving in New Orleans on December 1, Jackson instituted martial law in the city, as he worried about the loyalty of the citys Creole and Spanish inhabitants. At the same time, he formed an alliance with Jean Lafittes smugglers, and formed military units consisting of AfricanAmericans and Muscogees, in addition to recruiting volunteers in the city. Jackson received some criticism for paying white and nonwhite volunteers the same salary. These forces, along with U.S. Army regulars and volunteers from surrounding states, joined with Jacksons force in defending New Orleans. The approaching British force, led by Admiral Alexander Cochrane and later General Edward Pakenham, consisted of over 10,000 soldiers, many of whom had served in the Napoleonic Wars. Jackson only had about 5,000 men. Jackson at the Battle of New Orleans, painted by Thomas Sully in 1845 from an earlier portrait he had completed from life in 1824 The British arrived on the east bank of the Mississippi River on the morning of December 23. That evening Jackson attacked the British and temporarily drove them back. On January 8, 1815, the British launched a major frontal assault against Jacksons defenses. Despite some success in attacking the right flank, the overall attack ended in disaster. For the battle on January 8, Jackson admitted to only 71 total casualties. Of these, 13 men were killed, 39 wounded, and 19 missing or captured. The British, however, admitted 2,037 casualties. Of these, 291 men were killed , 1,262 wounded, and 484 missing or captured. After the battle, the British retreated from the area, and open hostilities ended shortly thereafter when word spread that the Treaty of Ghent had been signed in Europe that December. Coming in the waning days of the war, Jacksons victory made him a national hero, as the country celebrated the end of what many called the Second American Revolution against the British. By a Congressional resolution on February 27, 1815, Jackson was given the Thanks of Congress and awarded a Congressional Gold Medal. Alexis de Tocqueville later wrote in Democracy in America that Jackson was raised to the Presidency, and has been maintained there, solely by the recollection of a victory which he gained, twenty years ago, under the walls of New Orleans. Enforced martial law in New Orleans Jackson, still not knowing for certain of the treatys signing, refused to lift martial law in the city. He ordered the arrest of U. S. District Court Judge Dominic A. Hall in March 1815, after the judge signed a writ of habeas corpus on behalf of a Louisiana legislator whom Jackson had arrested. State senator Louis Louaillier had written an anonymous piece in the New Orleans newspaper, challenging Jacksons refusal to release the militia after the British ceded the field of battle. Jackson did not relent his campaign of suppressing dissent until after ordering the arrest of a Louisiana legislator, a federal judge, and a lawyer, and after the intervention of State Judge Joshua Lewis. Lewis was simultaneously serving under Jackson in the militia, and also had signed a writ of habeas corpus against Jackson, his commanding officer, seeking Judge Halls release. Civilian authorities in New Orleans had reason to fear Jackson he summarily ordered the execution of six members of the militia. Their deaths were not revealed until the Coffin Handbills were circulated during his 1828 presidential campaign. First Seminole War Trial of Robert Ambrister during the Seminole War. Ambrister was one of two British subjects executed by General Jackson. Following the war, Jackson remained in command of Army forces on the southern border of the U.S. He conducted official business from The Hermitage. He signed treaties with the Cherokee and Chickasaw which gained for the United States large parts of Tennessee and Kentucky. The treaty with the Chickasaw, finally agreed to later in the year, is commonly known as the Jackson Purchase. Several Native American tribes, which became known as the Seminole, straddled the border between the U.S. and Florida. The Seminole, in alliance with escaped slaves, frequently raided Georgia settlements before retreating back into Florida. These skirmishes continually escalated, and the conflict is now known as the First Seminole War. In 1816, Jackson led a detachment into Florida which destroyed the Negro Fort, a community of escaped slaves and their descendants. Jackson was ordered by President James Monroe in December 1817 to lead a campaign in Georgia against the Seminole and Creek Indians. Jackson was also charged with preventing Spanish Florida from becoming a refuge for runaway slaves, after Spain promised freedom to fugitive slaves. Critics later alleged that Jackson exceeded orders in his Florida actions. His orders from President Monroe were to terminate the conflict. Jackson believed the best way to do this was to seize Florida from Spain once and for all. Before departing, Jackson wrote to Monroe, Let it be signified to me through any channel... that the possession of the Floridas would be desirable to the United States, and in sixty days it will be accomplished.. 1819 teracotta bust by William Rush of General Jackson Jackson invaded Florida on March 15, 1818, capturing Pensacola. He crushed Seminole and Spanish resistance in the region and captured two British agents, Robert Ambrister and Alexander Arbuthnot. After a brief trial, Jackson executed both British agents, causing a diplomatic incident with the British. Jacksons actions polarized Monroes cabinet, some of whom argued that Jackson had gone against Monroes orders and violated the Constitution, since the United States had not declared war upon Spain. Yet Jackson was defended by Secretary of State John Quincy Adams. Adams thought that Jacksons conquest of Florida would force Spain to finally sell the province, and Spain did indeed sell Florida to the United States in the Adams Ons Treaty of 1819. A congressional investigation exonerated Jackson, but Jackson was deeply angered by the criticism he received, particularly from Speaker of the House Henry Clay. After the ratification of the Adams Ons Treaty in 1821, Jackson briefly served as the Governor of Florida before returning to Tennessee. Presidential aspirations Election of 1824 Jackson in 1824, painted by Thomas Sully After returning to Tennessee, Jackson turned down an offer to run for governor of his home state, but accepted John Overtons plan to have the legislature nominate him for president. Jackson had come to detest Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford, who had been the most vocal critic of Jackson in Monroes cabinet, and he hoped to prevent Tennessees electoral votes from going to Crawford. Yet Jacksons nomination garnered a welcoming response even outside of Tennessee, as many Americans appreciated Jacksons attacks on banks. The Panic of 1819 had devastated the fortunes of many, and banks and politicians seen as supportive of banks were particularly unpopular. With his growing political viability, Jackson emerged as one of the five major presidential candidates, along with Crawford, Secretary of State Adams, Speaker of the House Henry Clay, and Secretary of War John C. Calhoun. During the Era of Good Feelings, the Federalist Party had faded away, and all five presidential contenders were members of the DemocraticRepublican Party. Jacksons campaign promoted him as a defender of the common people, as well as the one candidate who could rise above sectional divisions. On the major issues of the day, most prominently the tariff, Jackson expressed centrist beliefs, and opponents accused him of obfuscating his positions. At the forefront of Jacksons campaign was combatting corruption, which had increased during the Monroe administration. Jackson vowed to restore honesty in government and to scale back its excesses. In 1823, Jackson reluctantly allowed his name to be placed in contention for one of Tennessees U.S. Senate seats, and the legislature narrowly elected him. His return, after 24 years, 11 months, 3 days out of office, marks the second longest gap in service to the chamber in history. DemocraticRepublican presidential nominees had historically been chosen by informal Congressional nominating caucuses, but this method had become unpopular. In 1824, most of the DemocraticRepublicans in Congress boycotted the caucus. Those who attended backed Crawford for President and Albert Gallatin for Vice President. A Pennsylvania convention nominated Jackson for President a month later, stating that the irregular caucus ignored the voice of the people and was a vain hope that the American people might be thus deceived into a belief that he Crawford was the regular democratic candidate. Gallatin criticized Jackson as an honest man and the idol of the worshipers of military glory, but from incapacity, military habits, and habitual disregard of laws and constitutional provisions, altogether unfit for the office. After Jackson won the Pennsylvania nomination, Calhoun dropped out of the presidential race and successfully sought the vice presidency instead. In the presidential election, Jackson won a plurality of the electoral vote, taking several southern and western states as well as the midAtlantic states of Pennsylvania and New Jersey. He was the only candidate to win states outside of his regional base, as Adams dominated New England, Clay took three western states, and Crawford won Virginia and Georgia. Jackson won a plurality of the popular vote, taking 42 percent, although not all states held a popular vote for the presidency. He won 99 electoral votes, more than any other candidates, but still short of 131, which he needed for a true majority. With no candidate having won a majority of the electoral, the House of Representatives held a contingent election under the terms of the Twelfth Amendment. The amendment specifies that only the top three electoral votewinners are eligible to be elected by the House, so Clay was eliminated from contention. Jackson believed that he was likely to win this contingent election, as Crawford and Adams lacked Jacksons national appeal, and Crawford had suffered a debilitating stroke that made many doubt his physical fitness for the presidency. However, Clay saw Jackson as a dangerous demagogue who might topple the republic in favor of his own leadership. He threw his support behind Adams, who shared Clays support for federallyfunded internal improvements such as roads and canals. With Clays backing, Adams won the contingent election on the first ballot. Furious supporters of Jackson accused Clay and Adams of having reached a corrupt bargain after Adams appointed Clay as his Secretary of State. After the election, Jackson resigned his Senate seat and returned to Tennessee. Election of 1828 and death of Rachel Jackson 1828 election results Jackson was nominated for president by Tennessee legislature in October 1825, more than three years before the 1828 election. It was the earliest such nomination in presidential history, and it attested to the fact that Jacksons supporters began the 1828 campaign almost as soon as the 1824 campaign ended. Adamss presidency floundered, as his ambitious agenda faced defeat in a new era of mass politics. Critics led by Jackson attacked Adamss policies as a dangerous expansion of Federal power. Senator Martin Van Buren, who had been a prominent supporter of Crawford in the 1824 election, emerged as one of the strongest opponents of Adamss policies, and he settled on Jackson as his preferred candidate in the 1828 election. Van Buren was joined by Vice President Calhoun, who also opposed much of Adamss agenda on states rights grounds. Van Buren and other Jackson allies established numerous proJackson newspapers and clubs around the country, while Jackson avoided campaigning but made himself available to visitors at his Hermitage plantation. In the election, Jackson won a commanding 56 percent of the popular vote and 68 percent of the electoral vote. The election marked the definitive end of the oneparty Era of Good Feelings, as Jacksons supporters coalesced into the Democratic Party and Adamss followers became known as the National Republicans. The campaign was very much a personal one. As was the custom at the time, neither candidate personally campaigned, but their political followers organized many campaign events. Both candidates were rhetorically attacked in the press. Jackson was strongly attacked as a slave trader, who bought and sold slaves and moved them about in defiance of higher standards of slaveholder behavior. A series of pamphlets known as the Coffin Handbills were published to attack Jackson. One revealed that he had ordered the execution of six soldiers at New Orleans. Another accused him of engaging in cannibalism by eating the bodies of American Indians killed in battle, while still another labeled his mother a common prostitute and stated that Jacksons father was a mulatto man. Rachel Jackson was also a frequent target of attacks, and was widely accused of bigamy, a reference to the controversial situation of her marriage with Jackson.First Lady Biography Rachel Jackson National First Ladies Library. Web. Retrieved February 15, 2016. Jacksons campaigners fired back by claiming that while serving as Minister to Russia, Adams had procured a young girl to serve as a prostitute for Emperor Alexander I. They also stated that Adams had a billiard table in the White House and that he had charged the government for it. Rachel had been under extreme stress during the election, and often struggled while Jackson was away. She began experiencing significant physical stress during the election season. Jackson described her symptoms as excruciating pain in the left shoulder, arm, and breast. After struggling for three days, Rachel finally died of a heart attack on December 22, 1828 three weeks after her husbands victory in the election and 10 weeks before Jackson took office as President. A distraught Jackson had to be pulled from her so the undertaker could prepare the body. He felt that the accusations from Adamss supporters had hastened her death and never forgave him.Robert Remini, John Quincy Adams p. 119 Rachel was buried on Christmas Eve. May God Almighty forgive her murderers, Jackson swore at her funeral. I never can. Presidency 1829 1837 President Andrew JacksonNew York Ritchie Co. Jacksons name has been associated with Jacksonian democracy or the shift and expansion of democracy with the passing of some political power from established elites to ordinary voters based in political parties. The Age of Jackson shaped the national agenda and American politics. Jacksons philosophy as President was similar to that of Thomas Jefferson, advocating Republican values held by the Revolutionary War generation. Jackson took a moral tone, with the belief that agrarian sympathies, and a limited view of states rights and the federal government, would produce less corruption. He feared that monied and business interests would corrupt republican values. When South Carolina opposed the tariff law, he took a strong line in favor of nationalism and against secession. Jackson believed that the presidents authority was derived from the people, and that public officials should obey their will or resign. Jackson chose Martin Van Buren of New York as Secretary of State, John Eaton of Tennessee as Secretary of War, Samuel D. Ingham of Pennsylvania as Secretary of Treasury, John Branch of North Carolina as Secretary of Navy, John M. Berrien of Georgia as Attorney General, and William T. Barry of Kentucky as Postmaster General. Jacksons first choice of Cabinet proved to be unsuccessful, full of bitter partisanship and gossip. Inauguration On March 4, 1829, Andrew Jackson became the first United States presidentelect to take the oath of office on the East Portico of the U.S. Capitol. In his inaugural speech, Jackson promised to respect the sovereign powers of states and the constitutional limits of the presidency. He also promised to pursue reform by removing power from unfaithful or incompetent hands. At the conclusion of the ceremony, Jackson invited the public to the White House, where his supporters held a raucous party. Thousands of spectators overwhelmed the White House staff, and minor damage was caused to fixtures and furnishings. Jacksons populism earned him the nickname King Mob. Petticoat affair Jackson devoted a considerable amount of his presidential time during his early years in office responding to what came to be known as the Petticoat affair or Eaton affair. Washington gossip circulated among Jacksons Cabinet members and their wives, including Calhouns wife Floride Calhoun, concerning Secretary of War Eaton and his wife Peggy Eaton. Salacious rumors held that Peggy, as a barmaid in her fathers tavern, had been sexually promiscuous or had even been a prostitute. Controversy also ensued because Peggy had married soon after her previous husbands death, and it was alleged that she and her husband and engaged in an adulterous affair while her previous husband was still living. Petticoat politics emerged when the wives of cabinet members, led by Mrs. Calhoun, refused to socialize with the Eatons. Allowing a prostitute in the official family was of course unthinkable but Jackson refused to believe the rumors, telling his Cabinet that She is as chaste as a virgin Jackson believed that the dishonorable people were the rumormongers, who in essence questioned and dishonored Jackson himself by, in attempting to drive the Eatons out, daring to tell him who he could and could not have in his cabinet. Jackson was also reminded of the attacks that were made against his wife. These memories increased his dedication to defending Peggy Eaton. Meanwhile, the Cabinet wives insisted that the interests and honor of all American women was at stake. They believed a responsible woman should never accord a man sexual favors without the assurance that went with marriage. A woman who broke that code was dishonorable and unacceptable. Historian Daniel Walker Howe notes that this was the feminist spirit that in the next decade shaped the womans rights movement. Secretary of State Martin Van Buren, a widower, was already forming a coalition against Calhoun. He could now see his main chance to strike hard he took the side of Jackson and Eaton. In the spring of 1831, Jackson, at Van Burens suggestion, demanded the resignations of all the cabinet member except Barry. Van Buren himself resigned to avoid the appearance of bias. In 1832, Jackson nominated Van Buren to be Minister to England. Calhoun blocked the nomination with a tiebreaking vote against it, claiming the defeated nomination would ...kill him, sir, kill dead. He will never kick, sir, never kick. Van Buren, however, fully recovered and played a leading role in the Jacksons unofficial Kitchen Cabinet. The Kitchen Cabinet emerged as an unofficial group of advisors to the president. Its existence was partially rooted in Jacksons difficulties with his official cabinet, even after the purging. Indian removal policy Jacksons Indian Removal Act and subsequent treaties resulted in the forced removal of several Indian tribes from their traditional territories, including the Trail of Tears. Throughout his eight years in office, Jackson made about 70 treaties with Native American tribes both in the South and the Northwest. Jacksons presidency marked a new era in IndianAnglo American relations initiating a policy of Indian removal. Jackson himself sometimes participated in the treaty negotiating process with various Indian tribes, though other times he left the negotiations to his subordinates. The southern tribes included the Choctaw, Creek, Chickasaw, Seminole and the Cherokee. The northwest tribes include the Chippewa, Ottawa, and the Potawatomi. Relations between Indians and Americans increasingly grew tense and sometimes violent as a result of territorial conflicts. Previous presidents had at times supported removal or attempts to civilize the Indians, but generally let the problem play itself out with minimal intervention. There had developed a growing popular and political movement to deal with the issue, and out of this policy to relocate certain Indian populations. Jackson, never known for timidity, became an advocate for this relocation policy in what many historians consider the most controversial aspect of his presidency. In his First Annual Message to Congress, Jackson advocated land west of the Mississippi River be set aside for Indian tribes. On May 26, 1830, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, which Jackson signed into law two days later. The Act authorized the President to negotiate treaties to buy tribal lands in the east in exchange for lands farther west, outside of existing state borders. The act specifically pertained to the Five Civilized Tribes in the South, the conditions being that they could either move west or stay and obey state law. Jackson, Eaton, and General Coffee negotiated with the Chickasaw, who quickly agreed to move. Jackson put Eaton and Coffee in charge of negotiating with the Choctaw. Lacking Jacksons skills at negotiation, they frequently bribed to the chiefs in order to gain their submission. The tactics worked, and the chiefs agreed to move. The removal of the Choctaw took place in the winter of 1831 and 1832, and was wrought with misery and suffering. The Seminole, despite the signing of the Treaty of Paynes Landing in 1832, refused to move. In December 1835, this dispute began the Second Seminole War. The war lasted over six years, finally ending in 1842. Members of the Creek Nation had signed the Treaty of Cusseta in 1832, agreeing to move their tribe. However, the Creeks later resisted, leading to a second Creek War. A common complaint was that the men who had signed the treaties did not represent the whole tribe. Jackson painted by Earl, 1830 The state of Georgia became involved in a contentious dispute with the Cherokee, culminating in the 1832 Supreme Court decision in Worcester v. Georgia . In that decision, U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall, writing for the court, ruled that Georgia could not forbid whites from entering tribal lands, as it had attempted to do with two missionaries supposedly stirring up resistance amongst the tribespeople. Jackson is frequently attributed the following response John Marshall has made his decision, now let him enforce it. The quote, apparently indicating Jacksons dismissive view of the courts, was attributed to Jackson by Horace Greeley, who cited as his source Representative George N. Briggs. Remini argues that Jackson did not say it because, while it certainly sounds like Jackson...there was nothing for him to enforce. This is because a writ of habeas corpus had never been issued for the missionaries. The Court also did not ask federal marshals to carry out the decision, as had become standard. A group of Cherokees led by John Ridge negotiated the Treaty of New Echota. Ridge was not a widely recognized leader of the Cherokee, and this document was rejected by some as illegitimate. Another faction, led by John Ross, unsuccessfully petitioned to protest the proposed removal. The treaty was enforced by Jacksons successor, President Martin Van Buren, who sent 7,000 troops to carry out the relocation policy. Due to the infighting between political factions, many Cherokees thought their appeals were still being considered when the relocation began. subsequently, as many as 4,000 Cherokees died on the Trail of Tears in 1838. More than 45,000 American Indians were relocated to the West during Jacksons administration, though a few Cherokees walked back afterwards or migrated to the high Smoky Mountains. The Black Hawk War took place during Jacksons presidency in 1832 after a group of Indians crossed into U.S. territory. Jacksons initiatives to deal with the conflicts between Indians and American settlers has been a source of controversy. Starting around 1970, Jackson came under sharp attack from revisionists on the left, often on this issue. Howard Zinn called him the most aggressive enemy of the Indians in early American history and exterminator of Indians. In 1969, Francis Paul Prucha argued that Jacksons removal of the Five Civilized Tribes from the very hostile white environment in the Old South to Oklahoma probably saved their very existence.Francis Paul Prucha, Andrew Jacksons Indian policy a reassessment. Journal of American History 563 pp 527539. in JSTOR Similarly, Remini claims that, if not for Jacksons policies, the Southern tribes would have been totally wiped out, just like other tribesnamely, the Yamasee, Mahican, and Narragansettwhich did not move. Reforms, rotation of offices, and spoils system In an effort to purge the government of corruption, Jackson launched presidential investigations into all executive Cabinet offices and departments. He believed appointees should be hired on merit and withdrew many candidates he believed were lax in their handling of monies. He asked Congress to reform embezzlement laws, reduce fraudulent applications for federal pensions, revenue laws to prevent evasion of custom duties, and laws to improve government accounting. Jacksons Postmaster Barry resigned after a Congressional investigation into the postal service revealed mismanagement of mail services, collusion and favoritism in awarding lucrative contracts, failure to audit accounts and supervise contract performances. Jackson replaced Barry with Treasury Auditor and prominent Kitchen Cabinet member Amos Kendall, who went on to implement much needed reforms in the Postal Service. Jackson repeatedly called for the abolition of the Electoral College by constitutional amendment in his annual messages to Congress as President. In his third annual message to Congress, he expressed the view I have heretofore recommended amendments of the Federal Constitution giving the election of President and VicePresident to the people and limiting the service of the former to a single term. So important do I consider these changes in our fundamental law that I can not, in accordance with my sense of duty, omit to press them upon the consideration of a new Congress. Jacksons time in the presidency also saw various improvements in financial provisions for veterans and their dependents. The Service Pension Act of 1832, for instance, provided pensions to veterans even where there existed no obvious financial or physical need, while an Act of July 1836 enabled widows of Revolutionary War soldiers who met certain criteria to receive their husbands pensions. In 1836, Jackson established the tenhour day in national shipyards. Jackson enforced the Tenure of Office Act, signed earlier by President Monroe in 1820, that limited appointed office tenure and authorized the president to remove and appoint political party associates. Jackson believed that a rotation in office was actually a democratic reform preventing fathertoson succession of office and made civil service responsible to the popular will. Jackson declared that rotation of appointments in political office was a leading principle in the republican creed. Jackson noted, In a country where offices are created solely for the benefit of the people no one man has any more intrinsic right to official station than another. Jackson believed that rotating political appointments would prevent the development of a corrupt bureaucracy. The number of federal office holders removed by Jackson were exaggerated by his opponents Jackson only rotated about 20 of federal office holders during his first term, some for dereliction of duty rather than political purposes. Jackson, however, did use his image and presidential power to award loyal Democrats by granting them federal office appointments. Jacksons approach incorporated patriotism for country as qualification for holding office. Having appointed a soldier who had lost his leg fighting on the battlefield to a postmastership Jackson stated If he lost his leg fighting for his country, that is ... enough for me. Jacksons theory regarding rotation of office generated what would later be called the spoils system. The political realities of Washington, however, ultimately forced Jackson to make partisan appointments despite his personal reservations. Historians believe Jacksons presidency marked the beginning of an era of decline in public ethics. Supervision of bureaus and departments whose operations were outside of Washington proved to be difficult. Remini claims that because friendship, politics, and geography constituted the Presidents total criteria for appointments, most of his appointments were predictably substandard. Nullification crisis In 1828, Congress had approved the Tariff of Abominations, which set the tariff at an historically high rate. Southern planters, who sold their cotton on the world market, strongly opposed this tariff, which they saw as favoring northern interests. The issue nonetheless came to a head during Jacksons presidency, resulting in the Nullification Crisis, in which South Carolina threatened disunion. The South Carolina Exposition and Protest of 1828, secretly written by Calhoun, asserted that their state had the right to nullify declare void the tariff legislation of 1828. Although Jackson sympathized with the South in the tariff debate, he also vigorously supported a strong union, with effective powers for the central government. Jackson attempted to face down Calhoun over the issue, which developed into a bitter rivalry between the two men. One incident was at the April 13, 1830, Jefferson Day dinner, involving afterdinner toasts. Robert Hayne began by toasting to The Union of the States, and the Sovereignty of the States. Jackson then rose, and in a booming voice added Our federal Union It must be preserved a clear challenge to Calhoun. Calhoun clarified his position by responding The Union Next to our Liberty, the most dear In May 1830, Jackson discovered that Calhoun had asked President Monroe to censure thenGeneral Jackson for his invasion of Spanish Florida in 1818 while Calhoun was serving as Secretary of War. Calhouns and Jacksons relationship deteriorated further. By February 1831, the break between Calhoun and Jackson was final. Responding to inaccurate press reports about the feud, Calhoun had published letters between him and Jackson detailing the conflict in the United States Telegraph . Jackson and Calhoun began an angry correspondence which lasted until Jackson stopped it in July. The Telegraph, edited by Duff Green, had previously supported Jackson. After it took the side of Calhoun, Jackson needed a new organ for the administration. He enlisted the help of longtime supporter Francis Preston Blair, who in November 1830 established a newspaper known as The Washington Globe, which from then on served as the primary mouthpiece of the Democratic Party. On July 14, 1832, Jackson signed into law the Tariff of 1832. It was designed to placate the nullifiers by lowering tariff rates, but the nullifiers in South Carolina remained unsatisfied. On November 24, the South Carolina legislature officially nullified both the Tariff of 1832 and the Tariff of 1828. In response, Jackson sent U.S. Navy warships to Charleston harbor, and threatened to hang any man who worked to support nullification or secession. On December 28, 1832, with less than two months remaining in his term, Calhoun resigned as Vice President to become a U.S. Senator for South Carolina. In December 1832, Jackson issued a resounding proclamation against the nullifiers, stating that he considered the power to annul a law of the United States, assumed by one State, incompatible with the existence of the Union, contradicted expressly by the letter of the Constitution, unauthorized by its spirit, inconsistent with every principle on which it was founded, and destructive of the great object for which it was formed. South Carolina, the President declared, stood on the brink of insurrection and treason, and he appealed to the people of the state to reassert their allegiance to that Union for which their ancestors had fought. Jackson also denied the right of secession The Constitution... forms a government not a league... To say that any State may at pleasure secede from the Union is to say that the United States is not a nation.Syrett, 36. See also Jackson asked Congress to pass a Force Bill explicitly authorizing the use of military force to enforce the tariff, but its passage was delayed until protectionists led by Clay agreed to a reduced Compromise Tariff. The Force Bill and Compromise Tariff passed on March 1, 1833, and Jackson signed both. The South Carolina Convention then met and rescinded its nullification ordinance, but in a final show of defiance, nullified the Force Bill. On May 1, 1833, Jackson wrote, the tariff was only the pretext, and disunion and southern confederacy the real object. The next pretext will be the negro, or slavery question. Foreign affairs William C. Rives, Jacksons Minister to France, successfully negotiated a reparations treaty with France in 1831. Addressing the subject of foreign affairs in his First Annual Address to Congress, Jackson declared it to be his settled purpose to ask nothing that is not clearly right and to submit to nothing that is wrong. When Jackson took office, spoliation claims, or compensation demands for the capture of American ships and sailors, dating from the Napoleonic era, caused strained relations between the U.S. and French governments. The French Navy had captured and sent American ships to Spanish ports while holding their crews captive forcing them to labor without any charges or judicial rules. According to Secretary of State Martin Van Buren, relations between the U.S. and France were hopeless. Jacksons Minister to France, William C. Rives, through diplomacy was able to convince the French government to sign a reparations treaty on July 4, 1831, that would award the U.S. 25,000,000 in damages. The French government became delinquent in payment due to internal financial and political difficulties. The French king Louis Philippe I and his ministers blamed the French Chamber of Deputies. By 1834, the nonpayment of reparations by the French government drew Jacksons ire and he became impatient. In his December 1834 State of the Union address, Jackson sternly reprimanded the French government for nonpayment, stating the federal government was wholly disappointed by the French, and demanded Congress authorize trade reprisals against France. Feeling insulted by Jacksons words, the French people demanded an apology. In his December 1835 State of the Union Address, Jackson refused to apologize, stating he had a good opinion of the French people and his intentions were peaceful. Jackson described in lengthy and minute detail the history of events surrounding the treaty and his belief that the French government was purposely stalling payment. The French government accepted Jacksons statements as sincere and in February 1836, American reparations were paid. In addition to France, the Jackson administration successfully settled spoliation claims with Denmark, Portugal, and Spain. Jacksons state department was active and successful at making trade agreements with Russia, Spain, Turkey, Great Britain, and Siam. Under the treaty of Great Britain, American trade was reopened in the West Indies. The trade agreement with Siam was Americas first treaty between the United States and an Asiatic country. As a result, American exports increased 75 while imports increased 250. Jacksons attempt to purchase Texas from Mexico for 5,000,000 failed. The charg daffaires in Mexico, Colonel Anthony Butler, suggested that the U.S. take Texas over militarily, but Jackson refused. Butler was later replaced toward the end of Jacksons presidency. In 1835, the Texas Revolution began when proslavery American settlers in Texas fought the Mexican government for Texan independence. By May 1836, they had routed the Mexican military, establishing an independent Republic of Texas. The new Texas government legalized slavery and demanded recognition from President Jackson and annexation into the United States. However, Jackson was hesitant recognizing Texas, unconvinced that the new republic could maintain independence from Mexico, and not wanting to make Texas an antislavery issue during the 1836 election. The strategy worked the Democratic Party and national loyalties were held intact, and Van Buren was elected President. Jackson formally recognized the Republic of Texas, nominating a charg daffaires on the last full day of his Presidency, March 3, 1837. Jackson was unsuccessful in opening trade with China and Japan. He was unsuccessful at thwarting Great Britains presence and power in South America. Bank veto and election of 1832 1832 election results 1833 Democratic cartoon shows Jackson destroying the Devils bank The 1832 presidential election demonstrated the rapid development and organization of political parties during this time period. The Democratic Partys first national convention, held in Baltimore, nominated Jacksons choice for vice president, Van Buren. The National Republican Party, who had held their first convention in Baltimore earlier in December 1831, nominated Henry Clay, now a senator from Kentucky, and John Sergeant of Pennsylvania. The AntiMasonic Party, which had earlier held its convention also in Baltimore in September 1831, nominated William Wirt of Maryland and Amos Ellmaker of Pennsylvania both Jackson and Clay were Masons. In 1816, the Second Bank of the United States was chartered by President James Madison to restore the United States economy devastated by the War of 1812. Monroe had appointed Nicholas Biddle as the Banks executive. Clay hoped to make the Bank an issue in the election, so as to accuse Jackson of going beyond his powers if he vetoed the bill. In January 1832 Biddle submitted to Congress a renewal of the Banks charter four years before the original 20year charter was to end. Biddles recharter bill passed the Senate on June 11 and the House on July 3, 1832. Jackson believed that Bank was a fundamentally corrupt monopoly. Its stock was mostly held by foreigners, he insisted, and it exerted an unfair amount of control over the political system. He vetoed the bill on July 10. Jackson used the issue to promote his democratic values, believing the Bank was being run exclusively for the wealthy. Jackson stated the Bank made the rich richer and the potent more powerful. He accused it of making loans with the intent of influencing elections. The National Republican Party immediately made Jacksons veto of the Bank a political issue. Jacksons political opponents castigated the veto as the very slang of the leveller and demagogue, claiming Jackson was using class warfare to gain support from the common man. Jackson, however, managed to successfully portray his veto as a defense of the common man against governmental tyranny. Clay proved to be no match to Jacksons ability to resonate with the people and the Democratic Partys strong political networks. Democratic newspapers, parades, barbecues, and rallies increased Jacksons popularity. At Biddles direction, the Bank poured thousands of dollars into a campaign to defeat Jackson, seemingly confirming Jacksons view that it interfered in the political process. Jackson himself made numerous popular public appearances on his return trip from Tennessee to Washington D.C. Jackson won the election decisively by a landslide, receiving 54 percent of the popular vote and 219 electoral votes. Clay received 37 percent of the popular vote and 49 electoral votes. Wirt received only eight percent of the popular vote and seven electoral votes while the AntiMasonic Party folded. Jackson believed the solid victory was a popular mandate for his veto of the Banks recharter and his continued warfare on the Banks control over the national economy. Removal of deposits and censure In 1833, Jackson attempted to begin removing federal deposits from the bank, whose moneylending functions were taken over by the legions of local and state banks that materialized across America, thus drastically increasing credit and speculation. Jacksons moves were greatly controversial. He removed his moderately proBank Treasury Secretary Louis McLane, having him serve instead as Secretary of State, replacing Edward Livingston. He replaced McLane with William J. Duane. However, in September he fired Duane for refusing to remove the deposits. He replaced him with Attorney General Roger B. Taney, a strong opponent of the Bank. Under Taney, the deposits began to be removed. Biddle responded by stockpiling the Banks reserves and contracting credit, thus causing interest rates to rise and bringing about a financial panic. Intended to force Jackson into a compromise, the move backfired, increasing antiBank sentiment. In 1834, those who opposed Jacksons expansion of executive power united and formed the Whig Party, calling Jackson King Andrew I, and named their party after the English Whigs who opposed eighteenth century British monarchy. A movement emerged amongst Whigs in the Senate to censure Jackson. The censure was a political maneuver spearheaded by Jacksonrival Senator Henry Clay, which served only to perpetuate the animosity between him and Jackson. Jackson called Clay reckless and as full of fury as a drunken man in a brothel. On March 28, the Senate voted to censure Jackson 26 20. It also rejected Taney as Treasury Secretary. Finally, on January 16, 1837, when the Jacksonians had a majority in the Senate, the censure was expunged after years of effort by Jackson supporters. The expunction movement was led by Thomas Hart Benton, who, despite the brawl years earlier, had become an ardent supporter of the president. In 1836, in response to increased land speculation, Jackson issued the Specie Circular, an executive order that required buyers of government lands to pay in specie . The result was high demand for specie, which many banks could not meet in exchange for their notes, causing the Panic of 1837. The White House Van Buren biography notes, Basically the trouble was the 19thcentury cyclical economy of boom and bust, which was following its regular pattern, but Jacksons financial measures contributed to the crash. His destruction of the Second Bank of the United States had removed restrictions upon the inflationary practices of some state banks wild speculation in lands, based on easy bank credit, had swept the West. To end this speculation, Jackson in 1836 had issued a Specie Circular... Attack and assassination attempt Richard Lawrences attempt on Jacksons life, as depicted in an 1835 etching The first recorded physical attack on a U.S. president was directed at Jackson. He had ordered the dismissal of Robert B. Randolph from the navy for embezzlement. On May 6, 1833, Jackson sailed on USS Cygnet to Fredericksburg, Virginia, where he was to lay the cornerstone on a monument near the grave of Mary Ball Washington, George Washingtons mother. During a stopover near Alexandria, Randolph appeared and struck the President. He fled the scene chased by several members of Jacksons party, including the writer Washington Irving. Jackson declined to press charges. On January 30, 1835, what is believed to be the first attempt to kill a sitting President of the United States occurred just outside the United States Capitol. When Jackson was leaving through the East Portico after the funeral of South Carolina Representative Warren R. Davis, Richard Lawrence, an unemployed house painter from England, aimed a pistol at Jackson, which misfired. Lawrence then pulled out a second pistol, which also misfired. Historians believe the humid weather contributed to the double misfiring. Jackson, infuriated, attacked Lawrence with his cane. Others present, including DavyCrockett, restrained and disarmed Lawrence. Lawrence offered a variety of explanations for the shooting. He blamed Jackson for the loss of his job. He claimed that with the President dead, money would be more plenty, and that he could not rise until the President fell. Finally, Lawrence told his interrogators that he was a deposed English king specifically, Richard III, dead since 1485 and that Jackson was his clerk. He was deemed insane and was institutionalized. Afterwards, the pistols were tested and retested. Each time they performed perfectly. Many believed that Jackson had been protected by the same Providence that they believed also protected their young nation. The incident became a part of the Jacksonian mythos. Jackson initially suspected that a number of his political enemies might have orchestrated the attempt on his life. His suspicions were never proven. Antislavery tracts During the summer of 1835, Northern abolitionists began sending antislavery tracts through the U.S. Postal system into the South. Proslavery Southerners demanded that the postal service ban distribution of the materials, which were deemed incendiary. Some rioting also broke out. Jackson wanted sectional peace, and desired to placate Southerners ahead of the 1836 election. He fiercely disliked the abolitionists, whom he believed were, by instituting sectional jealousies, attempting to destroy the Union. However, Jackson also did not want to condone open insurrection. He supported the solution of Postmaster General Amos Kendall, which gave Southern postmasters discretionary powers to either send or detain the antislavery tracts. That December, Jackson called on Congress to prohibit the circulation through the South of incendiary publications intended to instigate the slaves to insurrection. U.S. Exploring Expedition , a brig ship laid down in 1835 and launched in May 1836 used in the U.S. Exploring Expedition Jackson initially opposed any federal exploratory scientific expeditions during his first term in office. The last scientific federally funded expeditions took place from 1817 to 1823, led by Stephen H. Harriman on the Red River of the North. Jacksons predecessor, President Adams, attempted to launch a scientific oceanic exploration in 1828, but Congress was unwilling to fund the effort. When Jackson assumed office in 1829 he pocketed Adams expedition plans. However, wanting to establish his presidential legacy, similar to Thomas Jefferson and the Lewis and Clark Expedition, Jackson finally sponsored scientific exploration during his second term. On May 18, 1836, Jackson signed a law creating and funding the oceanic United States Exploring Expedition. Jackson put Secretary of Navy Mahlon Dickerson in charge, to assemble suitable ships, officers, and scientific staff for the expedition with a planned launch before Jacksons term of office expired. Dickerson however proved unfit for the task, preparations stalled and the expedition was not launched until 1838, during the presidency of Van Buren. One brig ship, , later used in the expedition having been laid down, built, and commissioned by Secretary Dickerson in May 1836, circumnavigated the world, explored and mapped the Southern Ocean, confirming the existence of the Antarctica continent. Panic of 1837 A New York newspaper blamed the Panic of 1837 on Andrew Jackson, depicted in spectacles and top hat. The national economy following the withdrawal of the remaining funds from the Bank was booming and the federal government through duty revenues and sale of public lands was able to pay all bills. On January 1, 1835, Jackson paid off the entire national debt, the only time in U.S. history that has been accomplished. The objective had been reached in part through Jacksons reforms aimed at eliminating the misuse of funds and through his veto of legislation had he deemed extravagant. However, reckless speculation in land and railroads caused the Panic of 1837. Contributing factors included Jacksons veto of the Second National Bank renewal charter in 1832 and subsequent transfer of federal monies to state banks in 1833 that caused western banks to relax their lending standards. Two other Jacksonian acts in 1836 contributed to the Panic of 1837 the Specie Circular, which mandated western lands only be purchased by money backed by gold and silver, and the Deposit and Distribution Act, which transferred federal monies from eastern to western state banks and in turn led to a speculation frenzy by banks. Jacksons Specie Circular , albeit designed to reduce speculation and stabilize the economy, left many investors unable to afford to pay loans backed by gold and silver. The same year there was a downturn in Great Britains economy that stopped investment in the United States. As a result, the U.S. economy went into a depression, banks became insolvent, the national debt increased, business failures rose, cotton prices dropped, and unemployment dramatically increased. The depression that followed lasted for four years until 1841 when the economy began to rebound. Administration and cabinet Judicial appointments Jackson appointed six Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States. Most were undistinguished. His first appointee, John McLean, had been nominated in Barrys place after Barry had agreed to become postmaster general. McLean turned Whig and forever schemed to win the presidency. His next two appointeesHenry Baldwin and James Moore Waynedisagreed with Jackson on some points but were viewed poorly even by Jacksons enemies. In reward for his services, Jackson nominated Taney to the Court to fill a vacancy in January 1835, but the Senate basically rejected it. Chief Justice Marshall died in 1835, leaving two vacancies on the court. Jackson nominated Taney for Chief Justice and Philip Pendleton Barbour for Associate Justice. Both were confirmed by the new Senate. Taney in particular earned a reputation as a good jurist. On the last full day of his presidency, he nominated John Catron, who was confirmed. States admitted to the Union Two new states were admitted into the Union during Jacksons presidency Arkansas and Michigan . Both states helped Van Buren win the presidency in 1836 and increased Democratic power in Congress. Later life and death Photographic copy of an 1845 daguerreotype After serving two terms as president, Jackson retired to his Hermitage plantation in 1837, and immediately began putting it in order as it had been poorly managed in his absence by his adopted son, Andrew Jr. Although he suffered ill health, Jackson remained influential in both national and state politics. He was a firm advocate of the federal union of the states and rejected any talk of secession, insisting, I will die with the Union. Blamed for causing the Panic of 1837, he was unpopular in his early retirement. Jackson continued to denounce the perfidy and treachery of banks and urged his successor, Van Buren, to repudiate the Specie Circular as president. As a solution to the panic, he supported an Independent Treasury system, which was designed to hold the money balances of the government in the form of gold or silver and would be restricted from printing paper money so as to prevent further inflation. However, a coalition of conservative Democrats and Whigs opposed the bill, and it was not passed until 1840. During the delay, no effective remedy had been implemented for the depression. Van Buren grew deeply unpopular. A unified Whig Party nominated popular war hero William Henry Harrison and former Jacksonian John Tyler in the 1840 presidential election. The Whigs campaign style in many ways mimicked that of the Democrats during Jacksons campaigns. They depicted Van Buren as an aristocrat who did not care for the concerns of ordinary Americans, while glorifying Harrisons military record and portraying him as a man of the people. Jackson campaigned heavily for Van Buren in Tennessee. He favored the nomination of James K. Polk of Tennessee for vice president at the 1840 Democratic National Convention over unpopular incumbent Richard Mentor Johnson. However, no nominee was chosen, and the party chose to leave the decision up to individual state electors. Harrison won the election, and the Whigs captured majorities in both houses of Congress. The democracy of the United States has been shamefully beaten, Jackson wrote to Van Buren. but I trust, not conquered. However, Harrison died only a month into his term, and was replaced by Tyler. Jackson was encouraged because Tyler had a strong independent streak and was not bound by party lines. Sure enough, Tyler quickly incurred the wrath of the Whigs in 1841 when he vetoed two Whigsponsored bills to establish a new national bank, bringing satisfaction to Jackson and other Democrats. After the second veto, Tylers entire cabinet, with the exception of Daniel Webster, resigned. Jackson strongly favored the annexation of Texas, a feat he had been unable to accomplish during his own presidency. While Jackson still feared that annexation would stir up antislavery sentiment, his belief that the British would use Texas as a base to threaten the United States overrode his other concerns. He also insisted that Texas was part of the Louisiana Purchase and therefore rightfully belonged to the United States. At the request of Senator Robert J. Walker of Mississippi, acting on behalf of the Tyler administration, which also supported annexation, Jackson wrote several letters to Texas President Sam Houston, urging him to wait for the Senate to approve annexation and lecturing him on how much being a part of the United States would benefit Texas. Initially, Jackson again supported Van Buren for president in 1844 and Polk for vice president. When a letter from Calhoun to British Ambassador Richard Pakenham linking annexation to slavery was made public, Van Buren was moved into writing the Hamlet letter, opposing annexation. This effectively extinguished any support that Van Buren might previously have enjoyed in the South. Jackson then threw his support behind Polk for the nomination. At the 1844 Democratic National Convention, Polk emerged as the partys nominee after Van Buren failed to win the required twothirds majority of delegates. George M. Dallas was selected for vice president. Jackson convinced Tyler to drop his plans of running for reelection as an independent by promising, as Tyler requested, to welcome the president and his allies back into the Democratic Party and by instructing Blair to stop criticizing the president. Polk won the election, defeating the Whig nominee, Henry Clay. A bill of annexation was finally signed by Tyler on March 1, 1845. Jackson died at his plantation on June 8, 1845, at the age of 78, of chronic tuberculosis, dropsy, and heart failure. According to a newspaper account from the Boon Lick Times, he fainted whilst being removed from his chair to the bed ... but he subsequently revived ... Gen. Jackson died at the Hermitage at 6oclock P.M. on Sunday the 8th instant. ... When the messenger finally came, the old soldier, patriot and Christian was looking out for his approach. He is gone, but his memory lives, and will continue to live. In his will, Jackson left his entire estate to his adopted son, Andrew Jackson Jr., except for specifically enumerated items that were left to various friends and other family members. Personal life Family Jackson had three adopted sons Theodore, an Indian about whom little is known, Andrew Jackson Jr., the son of Rachels brother Severn Donelson, and Lyncoya, a Creek Indian orphan adopted by Jackson after the Battle of Tallushatchee. Lyncoya died of tuberculosis on July 1, 1828, at the age of sixteen. The Jacksons also acted as guardians for eight other children. John Samuel Donelson, Daniel Smith Donelson, and Andrew Jackson Donelson were the sons of Rachels brother Samuel Donelson, who died in 1804. Andrew Jackson Hutchings was Rachels orphaned grand nephew. Caroline Butler, Eliza Butler, Edward Butler, and Anthony Butler were the orphaned children of Edward Butler, a family friend. They came to live with the Jacksons after the death of their father. The Papers of Andrew Jackson 1821 1824 ed. Sam B. Smith, p 71 The widower Jackson invited Rachels niece Emily Donelson to serve as hostess at the White House. Emily was married to Andrew Jackson Donelson, who acted as Jacksons private secretary and in 1856 ran for Vice President on the American Party ticket. The relationship between the President and Emily became strained during the Petticoat affair, and the two became estranged for over a year. They eventually reconciled and she resumed her duties as White House hostess. Sarah Yorke Jackson, the wife of Andrew Jackson Jr., became cohostess of the White House in 1834. It was the only time in history when two women simultaneously acted as unofficial First Lady. Sarah took over all hostess duties after Emily died from tuberculosis in 1836. Jackson used Rip Raps as a retreat. Temperament Tennessee Gentleman , portrait of Jackson, c. 1831, from the collection of The Hermitage Jacksons quick temper was notorious. Biographer H. W. Brands notes that his opponents were terrified of his temper Observers likened him to a volcano, and only the most intrepid or recklessly curious cared to see it erupt. ...His close associates all had stories of his bloodcurdling oaths, his summoning of the Almighty to loose His wrath upon some miscreant, typically followed by his own vow to hang the villain or blow him to perdition. Given his record in duels, brawls, mutiny trials, and summary hearings listeners had to take his vows seriously. On the last day of the presidency, Jackson admitted that he had but two regrets, that he had been unable to shoot Henry Clay or to hang John C. Calhoun. Remini expressed the opinion that Jackson was often in control of his rage, and that he used it, along with his fearsome reputation, as a tool to get what he wanted. Physical appearance Jackson was a lean figure, standing at tall, and weighing between on average. Jackson also had an unruly shock of red hair, which had completely grayed by the time he became president at age 61. He had penetrating deep blue eyes. Jackson was one of the more sickly presidents, suffering from chronic headaches, abdominal pains, and a hacking cough. Much of his trouble was caused by a musket ball in his lung that was never removed, that often brought up blood and sometimes made his whole body shake. Religious faith In 1838, Jackson became a member of the First Presbyterian Church in Nashville. Jackson was a Freemason, initiated at Harmony Lodge No. 1 in Tennessee he also participated in chartering several other lodges in Tennessee. He was the only U.S. president to have served as Grand Master of a states Grand Lodge until Harry S. Truman in 1945. His Masonic apron is on display in the Tennessee State Museum. An obelisk and bronze Masonic plaque decorate his tomb at The Hermitage. Legacy and memory Historical reputation Equestrian statue of Gen. Jackson, Jackson County Courthouse, Kansas City, Missouri, commissioned by Judge Harry S. Truman Jackson remains one of the most studied and controversial figures in American history. Historian Charles Grier Sellers says, Andrew Jacksons masterful personality was enough by itself to make him one of the most controversial figures ever to stride across the American stage. His most controversial presidential actions included removal of the Indians from the southeast, the dismantling of the Bank of the United States, and his threat to use military force against the state of South Carolina to make it stop nullifying federal laws. Not at all controversial was his resounding victory over the British at New Orleans in the last battle of the War of 1812. He was the main founder of the modern Democratic Party and became its iconic hero. He was always a fierce partisan, with many friends and many enemies. Jackson was criticised by his contemporary Alexis de Tocqueville in Democracy in America for flattering the dominant ideas of his time, including the mistrust over the federal power, for sometimes enforcing his view by force and disrespect towards the institutions and the law Brands observes that Jacksons reputation declined after the mid20th century as his actions towards Indians and African Americans received new attention. After the Civil Rights movement, Brand writes, his unrepentant ownership of slaves marked him as one to be censured rather than praised. Further, By the turn of the present 21st century, it was scarcely an exaggeration to say that the one thing American schoolchildren learned about Jackson was that he was the author of the Trail of Tears. On a more favorable note, Remini argues that Jacksonian democracy...stretches the concept of democracy about as far as it can go and still remain workable....As such it has inspired much of the dynamic and dramatic events of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in American history Populism, Progressivism, the New and Fair Deals, and the programs of the New Frontier and Great Society. Jackson has long been honored, along with Thomas Jefferson, in the Jefferson Jackson Day fundraising dinners. Each year, the dinner has been held by state Democratic Party organizations to honor the two men whom the party regards as its founders. However, due to the fact that both Jefferson and Jackson were slave owners, as well as Jacksons Indian removal policies, many state party organizations have renamed the dinners. Portrayal on banknotes and stamps Jackson portrait on obverse 20 bill Jackson has appeared on U.S. banknotes as far back as 1869, and extending into the 21st century. His image has appeared on the 5, 10, 20 and 10,000 note. Most recently, his image appears on the U.S. 20 Federal reserve note, Series 20042006, with a redesigned, larger portrait. In 2016, Treasury Secretary Jack Lew announced his goal that by 2020 an image of Harriet Tubman would replace Jacksons depiction on the front side of the 20 banknote, and that an image of Jackson would be placed on the reverse side, though the final decision will be made by his successors.Harriet Tubman to Be Added to 20 Bill , by Nick Timiraos, April 20, 2016. Jackson has appeared on 13 different U.S. postage stamps. Only George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, and Benjamin Franklin have appeared more often.Scotts US Stamp Catalogue He first appeared on an 1863 2Cent stamp, which is commonly referred to by collectors as the Black Jack due to the large portraiture of Jackson on its face printed in pitch black. During the American Civil War the Confederate government also issued two Confederate postage stamps bearing Jacksons portrait, one a 2cent red stamp and the other a 2cent green stamp, both issued in 1863. Memorials The tomb of Andrew and Rachel Jackson located at The Hermitage Numerous counties and cities are named after him, including the city of Jacksonville in Florida and North Carolina the city of Jackson in Louisiana, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, and Tennessee Jackson County in Florida, Illinois, Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio, and Oregon and Jackson Parish in Louisiana. Memorials to Jackson include a set of four identical equestrian statues by the sculptor Clark Mills in Lafayette Square, Washington, D.C. in Jackson Square, New Orleans in Nashville on the grounds of the Tennessee State Capitol and in Jacksonville, Florida. Other equestrian statues of Jackson have been erected elsewhere, as in the State Capitol grounds in Raleigh, North Carolina. That statue controversially identifies him as one of the presidents North Carolina gave the nation, and he is featured alongside James Polk and Andrew Johnson, both U.S. presidents born in North Carolina. There is a bust of Andrew Jackson in Plaza Ferdinand VII in Pensacola, Florida, where he became the first governor of the Florida Territory in 1821. Popular culture depictions Jackson and his wife Rachel were the main subjects of a 1951 historical novel by Irving Stone, The Presidents Lady , which told the story of their lives up until Rachels death. The novel was the basis for the 1953 film of the same name starring Charlton Heston as Jackson and Susan Hayward as Rachel. Jackson has been a supporting character in a number of historical films and television productions. Lionel Barrymore played Jackson in The Gorgeous Hussy , a fictionalized biography of Peggy Eaton starring Joan Crawford. The Buccaneer , depicting the Battle of New Orleans, included Hugh Sothern as Jackson, and was remade in 1958 with Heston again playing Jackson. Basil Ruysdael played Jackson in Walt Disneys 1955 Davy Crockett TV miniseries. Wesley Addy appeared as Jackson in some episodes of the 1976 PBS miniseries The Adams Chronicles . Jackson is the protagonist of the comedic historic rock musical Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson with music and lyrics by Michael Friedman and book by Alex Timbers. See also List of United States Presidents on currency U.S. presidents on U.S. postage stamps References Bibliography Biographies Abridgment of Reminis 3volume biography. Specialized studies Latner Richard B. The Presidency of Andrew Jackson White House Politics, 1820 1837 , standard survey. Schama, Simon. The American Future A History . Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr. The Age of Jackson . . Winner of the Pulitzer Prize for History. history of ideas of the era. Syrett, Harold C. Andrew Jackson His Contribution to the American Tradition . on Jacksonian democracy Historiography Primary sources 7 volumes total. The Papers of Andrew Jackson Edited first by Sam B. Smith and Harriet Chappell Owsley, and now by Dan Feller, Sam B. Smith, Harriet Fason Chappell Owsley, and Harold D. Moser. , reprints his major messages and reports. Library of Congress. Andrew Jackson Papers, a digital archive that provides direct access to the manuscript images of many of the Jackson documents. online Further reading vol 1 online vol 2 online Bugg Jr. James L. ed. Jacksonian Democracy Myth or Reality , excerpts from scholars. Burstein, Andrew. The Passions of Andrew Jackson . . Cheathem, Mark R. Andrew Jackson, Slavery, and Historians. History Compass 9.4 326338. online Cheathem, Mark R. Andrew Jackson, Southerner Cheathem, Mark R., and Terry Corps, eds. Historical Dictionary of the Jacksonian Era and Manifest Destiny . Cheathem, Mark. Frontiersman or Southern Gentleman Newspaper Coverage of Andrew Jackson during the 1828 Presidential Campaign, The Readex Report 93 online Hays, Joel Stanford. Twisting the Law Legal Inconsistencies in Andrew Jacksons Treatment of NativeAmerican Sovereignty and State Sovereignty. Journal of Southern Legal History 21 157. Hofstadter, Richard. The American Political Tradition , chapter on Jackson. online in ACLS ebooks Mabry, Donald J., Short Book Bibliography on Andrew Jackson , Historical Text Archive. McLemore, Laura Lyons, ed. The Battle of New Orleans in History and Memory Parsons, Lynn H. The Birth of Modern Politics Andrew Jackson, John Quincy Adams, and the Election of 1828 excerpt and text search Ratner, Lorman A. Andrew Jackson and His Tennessee Lieutenants A Study in Political Culture . Remini, Robert V. and Robert O. Rupp. Andrew Jackson A Bibliography Remini, Robert V. Andrew Jackson, American National Biography . Sellers, Charles Grier Jr. Andrew Jackson versus the Historians, The Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. 44, No. 4. , pp.615 634. in JSTOR. Taylor, George Rogers, ed. Jackson Versus Biddle The Struggle over the Second Bank of the United States , excerpts from primary and secondary sources. Van Sledright, Bruce, and Peter Afflerbach. Reconstructing Andrew Jackson Prospective elementary teachers readings of revisionist history texts. Theory Research in Social Education 283 411444. Ward, John William. Andrew Jackson, Symbol for an Age how writers saw him. External links White House biography Andrew Jackson A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress Andrew Jackson at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia The Papers of Andrew Jackson at the Avalon Project The Hermitage, home of President Andrew Jackson Life Portrait of Andrew Jackson, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , April 26, 1999 The 1828 Campaign of Andrew Jackson and the Growth of Party Politics, lesson plan at the National Endowment for the Humanities Category1767 births Category1845 deaths Category18thcentury American politicians Category18thcentury Presbyterians Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury deaths from tuberculosis Category19thcentury Presbyterians CategoryAmerican military personnel of the War of 1812 CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryAmerican people of the Seminole Wars CategoryAmerican planters CategoryAmerican Presbyterians CategoryAmerican prosecutors CategoryAmerican Revolutionary War prisoners of war held by Great Britain CategoryAmerican shooting survivors CategoryAmerican slave owners CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryBurials in Tennessee CategoryCongressional Gold Medal recipients CategoryDeaths from edema CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party United States Senators CategoryDuellists CategoryGovernors of Florida Territory CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryInfectious disease deaths in Tennessee CategoryMasonic Grand Masters CategoryMembers of the American Antiquarian Society CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Tennessee CategoryPeople from Lancaster County, South Carolina CategoryPeople from Nashville, Tennessee CategoryPeople of the Creek War CategoryPresidents of the United States CategorySecond Party System CategorySmallpox survivors CategoryTennessee DemocraticRepublicans CategoryTennessee Democrats CategoryTennessee Jacksonians CategoryTennessee Supreme Court justices CategoryUnited States Army generals CategoryUnited States military governors CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1824 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1828 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1832 CategoryUnited States Senators fromTennessee
Andrew Johnson was the 17th President of the United States, serving from 1865 to 1869. Johnson became president as he was vice president at the time of the assassination of Abraham Lincoln. A Democrat who ran with Lincoln on the National Union ticket, Johnson came to office as the Civil War concluded. The new president favored quick restoration of the seceded states to the Union. His plans did not give protection to the former slaves, and he came into conflict with the Republicandominated Congress, culminating in his impeachment by the House of Representatives. He was acquitted in the Senate by one vote. Johnson was born in poverty in Raleigh, North Carolina. Apprenticed as a tailor, he worked in several frontier towns before settling in Greeneville, Tennessee. He served as alderman and mayor there before being elected to the Tennessee House of Representatives in 1835. After brief service in the Tennessee Senate, Johnson was elected to the federal House of Representatives in 1843, where he served five twoyear terms. He became Governor of Tennessee for four years, and was elected by the legislature to the US Senate in 1857. In his congressional service, he sought passage of the Homestead Bill, which was enacted soon after he left his Senate seat in 1862. As Southern slave states, including Tennessee, seceded to form the Confederate States of America, Johnson remained firmly with the Union. He was the only sitting senator from a Confederate state who did not resign his seat upon learning of his states secession. In 1862, Lincoln appointed him as military governor of Tennessee after most of it had been retaken. In 1864, Johnson, as a War Democrat and Southern Unionist, was a logical choice as running mate for Lincoln, who wished to send a message of national unity in his reelection campaign their ticket easily won. When Johnson was sworn in as vice president in March 1865, he gave a rambling speech, after which he secluded himself to avoid public ridicule. Six weeks later, the assassination of Lincoln made him president. Johnson implemented his own form of Presidential Reconstruction a series of proclamations directing the seceded states to hold conventions and elections to reform their civil governments. When Southern states returned many of their old leaders, and passed Black Codes to deprive the freedmen of many civil liberties, Congressional Republicans refused to seat legislators from those states and advanced legislation to overrule the Southern actions. Johnson vetoed their bills, and Congressional Republicans overrode him, setting a pattern for the remainder of his presidency.Johnson saw 15 of his vetoes overridden by Congress, more than any other President, before or since. Johnson opposed the Fourteenth Amendment, which gave citizenship to former slaves. In 1866, Johnson went on an unprecedented national tour promoting his executive policies, seeking to destroy his Republican opponents. As the conflict between the branches of government grew, Congress passed the Tenure of Office Act, restricting Johnsons ability to fire Cabinet officials. When he persisted in trying to dismiss Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, he was impeached by the House of Representatives, and narrowly avoided conviction in the Senate and removal from office. After failing to win the 1868 Democratic presidential nomination, Johnson left office in 1869. Returning to Tennessee after his presidency, Johnson sought political vindication, and gained it in his eyes when he was elected to the Senate again in 1875, making Johnson the only former president to serve in the Senate. He died just months into his term. While some admire Johnsons strict constitutionalism, his strong opposition to federally guaranteed rights for African Americans is widely criticized. He is regarded by many historians as one of the worst presidents in American history. Early life and career Childhood Johnsons boyhood home, located at the Mordecai Historic Park in Raleigh, North Carolina Andrew Johnson was born in Raleigh, North Carolina, on December 29, 1808, to Jacob Johnson and Mary McDonough , a laundress. He was of English, Scottish, and Irish ancestry. He had a brother William, four years his senior, and an older sister Elizabeth, who died in childhood. Johnsons birth in a log cabin was a political asset in the mid19th century, and he would frequently remind voters of his humble origins. Jacob Johnson was a poor man, as had been his father, William Johnson, but he became town constable of Raleigh before marrying and starting a family. He died of an apparent heart attack while ringing the town bell, shortly after rescuing three drowning men, when his son Andrew was three. Polly Johnson worked as a washerwoman and became the sole support of her family. Her occupation was then looked down on, as it often took her into other homes unaccompanied. There were even rumors that Andrew, who did not resemble his brother or sister, had been fathered by another man. Polly Johnson eventually remarried, to Turner Doughtry, who was as poor as she was. Johnsons mother apprenticed her son William to a tailor, James Selby. Andrew also became an apprentice in Selbys shop at age ten and was legally bound to serve until his 21st birthday. Johnson lived with his mother for part of his service, and one of Selbys employees taught him rudimentary literacy skills. His education was augmented by citizens who would come to Selbys shop to read to the tailors as they worked. Even before he became an apprentice, Johnson came to listen. The readings caused a lifelong love of learning, and one of his biographers, Annette GordonReed, suggests that Johnson, later a gifted public speaker, learned the art as he threaded needles and cut cloth. Johnson was not happy at James Selbys, and after about five years, both he and his brother ran away. Selby responded by placing a reward for their return Ten Dollars Reward. Ran away from the subscriber, two apprentice boys, legally bound, named William and Andrew Johnson... payment to any person who will deliver said apprentices to me in Raleigh, or I will give the above reward for Andrew Johnson alone. The brothers went to Carthage, North Carolina, where Andrew Johnson worked as a tailor for several months. Fearing he would be arrested and returned to Raleigh, Johnson moved to Laurens, South Carolina. He found work quickly, met his first love, Mary Wood, and made her a quilt as a gift. However, she rejected his marriage proposal. He returned to Raleigh, hoping to buy out his apprenticeship, but could not come to terms with Selby. Unable to stay in Raleigh, where he risked being apprehended for abandoning Selby, he decided to move west. Move to Tennessee Johnson left North Carolina for Tennessee, traveling mostly on foot. After a brief period in Knoxville, he moved to Mooresville, Alabama. He then worked as a tailor in Columbia, Tennessee, but was called back to Raleigh by his mother and stepfather, who saw limited opportunities there and who wished to emigrate west. Johnson and his party traveled through the Blue Ridge Mountains to Greeneville, Tennessee. Andrew Johnson fell in love with the town at first sight, and when he became prosperous purchased the land where he had first camped and planted a tree in commemoration. In Greeneville, Johnson established a successful tailoring business in the front of his home. In 1827, at the age of 18, he married 16yearold Eliza McCardle, the daughter of a local shoemaker. The pair were married by Justice of the Peace Mordecai Lincoln, first cousin of Thomas Lincoln, whose son would become president. The Johnsons were married for almost 50 years and had five children Martha , Charles , Mary , Robert , and Andrew Jr. . Though she suffered from Tuberculosis, Eliza supported her husbands endeavors. She taught him mathematics skills and tutored him to improve his writing. Shy and retiring by nature, Eliza Johnson usually remained in Greeneville during Johnsons political rise. She was not often seen during her husbands presidency their daughter Martha usually served as official hostess. Johnsons tailoring business prospered during the early years of the marriage, enabling him to hire help and giving him the funds to invest profitably in real estate. He later boasted of his talents as a tailor, my work never ripped or gave way. He was a voracious reader. Books about famous orators aroused his interest in political dialogue, and he had private debates on the issues of the day with customers who held opposing views. He also took part in debates at Greeneville College. Political rise Tennessee politician Johnson helped organize a mechanics ticket in the 1829 Greeneville municipal election. He was elected town alderman, along with his friends Blackston McDannel and Mordecai Lincoln. Following the 1831 Nat Turner slave rebellion, a state convention was called to pass a new constitution, including provisions to disenfranchise free people of color. The convention also wanted to reform real estate tax rates, and provide ways of funding improvements to Tennessees infrastructure. The constitution was submitted for a public vote, and Johnson spoke widely for its adoption the successful campaign provided him with statewide exposure. On January 4, 1834, his fellow aldermen elected him mayor of Greeneville. Eliza McCardle Johnson In 1835, Johnson made a bid for election to the floater seat which Greene County shared with neighboring Washington County in the Tennessee House of Representatives. According to his biographer, Hans L. Trefousse, Johnson demolished the opposition in debate and won the election with almost a two to one margin. Soon after taking his seat, Johnson purchased his first slave, Dolly, aged 14. Dolly had three children over the years. Johnson had the reputation of treating his slaves kindly, and the fact that Dolly was darkskinned, and her offspring much lighter, led to speculation both during and after his lifetime that he was the father. During his Greeneville days, Johnson joined the Tennessee Militia as a member of the 90th Regiment. He attained the rank of colonel, though while an enrolled member, Johnson was fined for an unknown offense. Afterwards, he was often addressed or referred to by his rank. In his first term in the legislature, which met in the state capital of Nashville, Johnson did not consistently vote with either the Democratic or the newly formed Whig Party, though he revered President Andrew Jackson, a Democrat and Tennessean. The major parties were still determining their core values and policy proposals, with the party system in a state of flux. The Whig Party had organized in opposition to Jackson, fearing the concentration of power in the Executive Branch of the government Johnson differed from the Whigs as he opposed more than minimal government spending and spoke against aid for the railroads, while his constituents hoped for improvements in transportation. After Brookins Campbell and the Whigs defeated Johnson for reelection in 1837, Johnson would not lose another race for thirty years. In 1839, he sought to regain his seat, initially as a Whig, but when another candidate sought the Whig nomination, he ran as a Democrat and was elected. From that time he supported the Democratic party and built a powerful political machine in Greene County. Johnson became a strong advocate of the Democratic Party, noted for his oratory, and in an era when public speaking both informed the public and entertained it, people flocked to hear him. In 1840, Johnson was selected as a presidential elector for Tennessee, giving him more statewide publicity. Although Democratic President Martin Van Buren was defeated by former Ohio senator William Henry Harrison, Johnson was instrumental in keeping Tennessee and Greene County in the Democratic column. He was elected to the Tennessee Senate in 1841, where he served a twoyear term. He had achieved financial success in his tailoring business, but sold it to concentrate on politics. He had also acquired additional real estate, including a larger home and a farm , and among his assets numbered eight or nine slaves. Congressman Having served in both houses of the state legislature, Johnson saw election to Congress as the next step in his political career. He engaged in a number of political maneuvers to gain Democratic support, including the displacement of the Whig postmaster in Greeneville, and defeated Jonesborough lawyer John A. Aiken by 5,495 votes to 4,892. In Washington, he joined a new Democratic majority in the House of Representatives. Johnson advocated for the interests of the poor, maintained an antiabolitionist stance, argued for only limited spending by the government and opposed protective tariffs. With Eliza remaining in Greeneville, Congressman Johnson shunned social functions in favor of study in the Library of Congress. Although a fellow Tennessee Democrat, James K. Polk, was elected president in 1844, and Johnson had campaigned for him, the two men had difficult relations, and President Polk refused some of his patronage suggestions. Johnson believed, as did many Southern Democrats, that the Constitution protected private property, including slaves, and thus prohibited the federal and state governments from abolishing slavery. He won a second term in 1845 against Wiliam G. Brownlow, presenting himself as the defender of the poor against the aristocracy. In his second term, Johnson supported the Polk administrations decision to fight the Mexican War, seen by some Northerners as an attempt to gain territory to expand slavery westward, and opposed the Wilmot Proviso, a proposal to ban slavery in any territory gained from Mexico. He introduced for the first time his Homestead Bill, to grant to people willing to settle the land and gain title to it. This issue was especially important to Johnson because of his own humble beginnings. In the presidential election of 1848, the Democrats split over the slavery issue, and abolitionists formed the Free Soil Party, with former president Van Buren as their nominee. Johnson supported the Democratic candidate, former Michigan senator Lewis Cass. With the party split, Whig nominee General Zachary Taylor was easily victorious, and carried Tennessee. Johnsons relations with Polk remained poor the President recorded of his final New Years reception in 1849 that Johnson, due to national interest in new railroad construction and in response to the need for better transportation in his own district, also supported government assistance for the East Tennessee and Virginia Railroad. The Andrew Johnson House, built in 1851, Greeneville, Tennessee In his campaign for a fourth term, Johnson concentrated on three issues slavery, homesteads and judicial elections. He defeated his opponent, Nathaniel G. Taylor, in August 1849, with a greater margin of victory than in previous campaigns. When the House convened in December, the party division caused by the Free Soil Party precluded the formation of the majority needed to elect a Speaker. Johnson proposed adoption of a rule allowing election of a Speaker by a plurality some weeks later others took up a similar proposal, and Democrat Howell Cobb was elected. Once the Speaker election had concluded and Congress was ready to conduct legislative business, the issue of slavery took center stage. Northerners sought to admit California, a free state, to the Union. Kentuckys Henry Clay introduced in the Senate a series of resolutions, the Compromise of 1850, to admit California and pass legislation sought by each side. Johnson voted for all the provisions except for the abolition of slavery in the nations capital. He pressed resolutions for constitutional amendments to provide for popular election of senators and of the president , and limiting the tenure of federal judges to 12 years. These were all defeated. A group of Democrats nominated Landon Carter Haynes to oppose Johnson as he sought a fifth term the Whigs were so pleased with the internecine battle among the Democrats in the general election that they did not nominate a candidate of their own. The campaign included fierce debates Johnsons main issue was the passage of the Homestead Bill Haynes contended it would facilitate abolition. Johnson won the election by more than 1600 votes. Though he was not enamored of the partys presidential nominee in 1852, former New Hampshire senator Franklin Pierce, Johnson campaigned for him. Pierce was elected, but he failed to carry Tennessee. In 1852, Johnson managed to get the House to pass his Homestead Bill, but it failed in the Senate. The Whigs had gained control of the Tennessee legislature, and, under the leadership of Gustavus Henry, redrew the boundaries of Johnsons First District to make it a safe seat for their party. The Nashville Union termed this Henrymandering lamented Johnson, I have no political future. Governor of Tennessee Attribution William Brown Cooper, Sitter Andrew Johnson, Date 1856 If Johnson considered retiring from politics upon deciding not to seek reelection, he soon changed his mind. His political friends began to maneuver to get him the nomination for governor. The Democratic convention unanimously named him, though some party members were not happy at his selection. The Whigs had won the past two gubernatorial elections, and still controlled the legislature. That party nominated Henry, making the Henrymandering of the First District an immediate issue. The two men debated in county seats the length of Tennessee before the meetings were called off two weeks before the August 1853 election due to illness in Henrys family. Johnson won the election by 63,413 votes to 61,163 some votes for him were cast in return for his promise to support Whig Nathaniel Taylor for his old seat in Congress. Tennessees governor had little power Johnson could propose legislation but not veto it, and most appointments were made by the Whigcontrolled legislature. Nevertheless, the office was a bully pulpit that allowed him to publicize himself and his political views. He succeeded in getting the appointments he wanted in return for his endorsement of John Bell, a Whig, for one of the states U.S. Senate seats. In his first biennial speech, Johnson urged simplification of the state judicial system, abolition of the Bank of Tennessee, and establishment of an agency to provide uniformity in weights and measures the last was passed. Johnson was critical of the Tennessee common school system and suggested funding be increased via taxes, either statewide or county by county a mixture of the two was passed. Reforms carried out during Johnsons time as governor included the foundation of the States public library and its first public school system, and the initiation of regular state fairs to benefit craftsmen and farmers. Although the Whig Party was on its final decline nationally, it remained strong in Tennessee, and the outlook for Democrats there in 1855 was poor. Feeling that reelection as governor was necessary to give him a chance at the higher offices he sought, Johnson agreed to make the run. Meredith P. Gentry received the Whig nomination. A series of more than a dozen vitriolic debates ensued. The issues in the campaign were slavery, the prohibition of alcohol, and the nativist positions of the Know Nothing Party. Johnson favored the first, but opposed the others. Gentry was more equivocal on the alcohol question, and had gained the support of the Know Nothings, a group Johnson portrayed as a secret society. Johnson was unexpectedly victorious, albeit with a narrower margin than in 1853. When the presidential election of 1856 approached, Johnson hoped to be nominated some Tennessee county conventions designated him a favorite son. His position that the best interests of the Union were served by slavery in some areas made him a practical compromise candidate for president. He was never a major contender the nomination fell to former Pennsylvania senator James Buchanan. Though he was not impressed by either, Johnson campaigned for Buchanan and his running mate, John C. Breckinridge, who were elected. Johnson decided not to seek a third term as governor, with an eye towards election to the U.S. Senate. In 1857, while returning from Washington, his train derailed, causing serious damage to his right arm. This injury would trouble him in the years to come. United States Senator Senator Johnson, 1859 Homestead Bill advocate The victors in the 1857 state legislative campaign would, once they convened in October, elect a United States Senator. Former Whig governor William B. Campbell wrote to his uncle, The great anxiety of the Whigs is to elect a majority in the legislature so as to defeat Andrew Johnson for senator. Should the Democrats have the majority, he will certainly be their choice, and there is no man living to whom the Americans and Whigs have as much antipathy as Johnson. The governor spoke widely in the campaign, and his party won the gubernatorial race and control of the legislature. Johnsons final address as governor gave him the chance to influence his electors, and he made proposals popular among Democrats. Two days later the legislature elected him to the Senate. The opposition was appalled, with the Richmond Whig newspaper referring to him as the vilest radical and most unscrupulous demagogue in the Union. Johnson gained high office due to his proven record as a man popular among the small farmers and selfemployed tradesmen who made up much of Tennessees electorate. He called them the plebeians he was less popular among the planters and lawyers who led the state Democratic Party, but none could match him as a votegetter. After his death, one Tennessee voter wrote of him, Johnson was always the same to everyone... the honors heaped upon him did not make him forget to be kind to the humblest citizen. Always seen in impeccably tailored clothing, he cut an impressive figure, and had the stamina to endure lengthy campaigns with daily travel over bad roads leading to another speech or debate. Mostly denied the partys machinery, he relied on a network of friends, advisers, and contacts. One friend, Hugh Douglas, stated in a letter to him, you have been in the way of our would be great men for a long time. At heart many of us never wanted you to be Governor only none of the rest of us Could have been elected at the time and we only wanted to use you. Then we did not want you to go to the Senate but the people would send you . The new senator took his seat when Congress convened in December 1857 . He came to Washington as usual without his wife and family Eliza would visit Washington only once during Johnsons first time as senator, in 1860. Johnson immediately set about introducing the Homestead Bill in the Senate, but as most senators who supported it were Northern , the matter became caught up in suspicions over the slavery issue. Southern senators felt that those who took advantage of the provisions of the Homestead Bill were more likely to be Northern nonslaveholders. The issue of slavery had been complicated by the Supreme Courts ruling earlier in the year in Dred Scott v. Sandford that slavery could not be prohibited in the territories. Johnson, a slaveholding senator from a Southern state, made a major speech in the Senate the following May in an attempt to convince his colleagues that the Homestead Bill and slavery were not incompatible. Nevertheless, Southern opposition was key to defeating the legislation, 30 22. In 1859, it failed on a procedural vote when Vice President Breckinridge broke a tie against the bill, and in 1860, a watereddown version passed both houses, only to be vetoed by Buchanan at the urging of Southerners. Johnson continued his opposition to spending, chairing a committee to control it. He argued against funding to build Washington, D.C.s infrastructure, stating that it was unfair to expect state citizens to pay for the citys streets, even if it was the seat of government. He opposed spending money for troops to put down the revolt by the Mormons in Utah Territory, arguing for temporary volunteers as the United States should not have a standing army. Secession crisis Johnson in 1860 In October 1859, abolitionist John Brown and sympathizers raided the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry, Virginia . Tensions in Washington between pro and antislavery forces increased greatly. Johnson gave a major speech in the Senate in December, decrying Northerners who would endanger the Union by seeking to outlaw slavery. The Tennessee senator stated that all men are created equal from the Declaration of Independence did not apply to African Americans, since the Constitution of Illinois contained that phrase and that document barred voting by African Americans. Johnson hoped that he would be a compromise candidate for the presidential nomination as the Democratic Party tore itself apart over the slavery question. Busy with the Homestead Bill during the 1860 Democratic National Convention in Charleston, South Carolina, he sent two of his sons and his chief political adviser to represent his interests in the backroom dealmaking. The convention deadlocked, with no candidate able to gain the required twothirds vote, but the sides were too far apart to consider Johnson as a compromise. The party split, with Northerners backing Illinois Senator Stephen Douglas while Southerners, including Johnson, supported Vice President Breckinridge for president. With former Tennessee senator John Bell running a fourthparty candidacy and further dividing the vote, the Republican Party elected its first president, former Illinois representative Abraham Lincoln. The election of Lincoln, known to be against the spread of slavery, was unacceptable to many in the South. Although secession from the Union had not been an issue in the campaign, talk of it began in the Southern states. Johnson took to the Senate floor after the election, giving a speech well received in the North, I will not give up this government... No I intend to stand by it... and I invite every man who is a patriot to... rally around the altar of our common country... and swear by our God, and all that is sacred and holy, that the Constitution shall be saved, and the Union preserved. As Southern senators announced they would resign if their states seceded, he reminded Mississippi Senator Jefferson Davis that if Southerners would only hold to their seats, the Democrats would control the Senate, and could defend the Souths interests against any infringement by Lincoln. GordonReed points out that while Johnsons belief in an indissoluble Union was sincere, he had alienated Southern leaders, including Davis, who would soon be the president of the Confederate States of America, formed by the seceding states. If the Tennessean had backed the Confederacy, he would have had small influence in its government. Johnson returned home when his state took up the issue of secession. His successor as governor, Isham G. Harris, and the legislature, organized a referendum on whether to have a constitutional convention to authorize secession when that failed, they put the question of leaving the Union to a popular vote. Despite threats on Johnsons life, and actual assaults, he campaigned against both questions, sometimes speaking with a gun on the lectern before him. Although Johnsons eastern region of Tennessee was largely against secession, the second referendum passed, and in June 1861, Tennessee joined the Confederacy. Believing he would be killed if he stayed, Johnson fled through the Cumberland Gap, where his party was in fact shot at. He left his wife and family in Greeneville. As the only member from a seceded state to remain in the Senate and the most prominent Southern Unionist, Johnson had Lincolns ear in the early months of the war. With most of Tennessee in Confederate hands, Johnson spent congressional recesses in Kentucky and Ohio, trying in vain to convince any Union commander who would listen to conduct an operation into East Tennessee. Military Governor of Tennessee Johnsons first tenure in the Senate came to a conclusion in March 1862 when Lincoln appointed him military governor of Tennessee. Much of the central and western portions of that seceded state had been recovered. Although some argued that civil government should simply resume once the Confederates were defeated in an area, Lincoln chose to use his power as commander in chief to appoint military governors over Unioncontrolled Southern regions. The Senate quickly confirmed Johnsons nomination along with the rank of brigadier general. In response, the Confederates confiscated his land and his slaves, and turned his home into a military hospital. Later in 1862, after his departure from the Senate and in the absence of most Southern legislators, the Homestead Bill was finally enacted. Along with legislation for landgrant colleges and for the transcontinental railroad, the Homestead Bill has been credited with opening the American West to settlement. As military governor, Johnson sought to eliminate rebel influence in the state. He demanded loyalty oaths from public officials, and shut down all newspapers owned by Confederate sympathizers. Much of eastern Tennessee remained in Confederate hands, and the ebb and flow of war during 1862 sometimes brought Confederate control again close to Nashville. However, the Confederates allowed his wife and family to pass through the lines to join him. Johnson undertook the defense of Nashville as best he could, though the city was continually harassed by cavalry raids led by General Nathan Bedford Forrest. Relief from Union regulars did not come until William S. Rosecrans defeated the Confederates at Murfreesboro in early 1863. Much of eastern Tennessee was captured later that year. When Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation in January 1863, declaring freedom for all slaves in Confederateheld areas, he exempted Tennessee at Johnsons request. The proclamation increased the debate over what should become of the slaves after the war, as not all Unionists supported abolition. Johnson finally decided that slavery had to end. He wrote, If the institution of slavery... seeks to overthrow it Government, then the Government has a clear right to destroy it. He reluctantly supported efforts to enlist former slaves into the Union Army, feeling that African Americans should perform menial tasks to release white Americans to do the fighting. Nevertheless, he succeeded in recruiting 20,000 black soldiers to serve the Union. Vice President Poster for the Lincoln and Johnson ticket by Currier and Ives In 1860, Lincolns running mate had been Maine Senator Hannibal Hamlin. Vice President Hamlin had served competently, was in good health, and was willing to run again. Nevertheless, Johnson emerged as running mate for Lincolns reelection bid in 1864. Lincoln considered several War Democrats for the ticket in 1864, and sent an agent to sound out General Benjamin Butler as a possible running mate. In May 1864, the President dispatched General Daniel Sickles to Nashville on a factfinding mission. Although Sickles denied he was there either to investigate or interview the military governor, Johnson biographer Hans L. Trefousse believes Sickless trip was connected to Johnsons subsequent nomination for vice president. According to historian Albert Castel in his account of Johnsons presidency, Lincoln was impressed by Johnsons administration of Tennessee. GordonReed points out that while the LincolnHamlin ticket might have been considered geographically balanced in 1860, having Johnson, the southern War Democrat, on the ticket sent the right message about the folly of secession and the continuing capacity for union within the country. Another factor was the desire of Secretary of State William Seward to frustrate the vicepresidential candidacy of his fellow New Yorker, former senator Daniel S. Dickinson, a War Democrat, as Seward would probably have had to yield his place if another New Yorker became vice president. Johnson, once he was told by reporters the likely purpose of Sickles visit, was active on his own behalf, giving speeches and having his political friends work behind the scenes to boost his candidacy. To sound a theme of unity, Lincoln in 1864 ran under the banner of the National Union Party, rather than the Republicans. At the partys convention in Baltimore in June, Lincoln was easily nominated, although there had been some talk of replacing him with a Cabinet officer or one of the more successful generals. After the convention backed Lincoln, former Secretary of War Simon Cameron offered a resolution to nominate Hamlin, but it was defeated. Johnson was nominated for vice president by C.M. Allen of Indiana with an Iowa delegate as seconder. On the first ballot, Johnson led with 200 votes to 150 for Hamlin and 108 for Dickinson. On the second ballot, Kentucky switched to vote for Johnson, beginning a stampede. Johnson was named on the second ballot with 491 votes to Hamlins 17 and eight for Dickinson the nomination was made unanimous. Lincoln expressed pleasure at the result, Andy Johnson, I think, is a good man. When word reached Nashville, a crowd assembled and the military governor obliged with a speech contending his selection as a Southerner meant that the rebel states had not actually left the Union. Although it was unusual at the time for a national candidate to actively campaign, Johnson gave a number of speeches in Tennessee, Kentucky, Ohio, and Indiana. He also sought to boost his chances in Tennessee while reestablishing civil government by making the loyalty oath even more restrictive, in that voters would now have to swear they opposed making a settlement with the Confederacy. The Democratic candidate for president, George McClellan, hoped to avoid additional bloodshed by negotiation, and so the stricter loyalty oath effectively disenfranchised his supporters. Lincoln declined to override Johnson, and their ticket took the state by 25,000 votes. Congress refused to count Tennessees electoral votes, but Lincoln and Johnson did not need them, having won in most states that had voted, and easily secured the election. 1865 cartoon showing Lincoln and Johnson using their talents as railsplitter and tailor to repair the Union Now Vice Presidentelect, Johnson was anxious to complete the work of reestablishing civilian government in Tennessee, although the timetable for the election of a new governor did not allow it to take place until after Inauguration Day, March 4. He hoped to remain in Nashville to complete his task, but was told by Lincolns advisers that he could not stay, but would be sworn in with Lincoln. In these months, Union troops finished the retaking of eastern Tennessee, including Greeneville. Just before his departure, the voters of Tennessee ratified a new constitution, abolishing slavery, on February 22, 1865. One of Johnsons final acts as military governor was to certify the results. Johnson traveled to Washington to be sworn in, although according to GordonReed, in light of what happened on March 4, 1865, it might have been better if Johnson had stayed in Nashville. He may have been ill Castel cited typhoid fever, though GordonReed notes that there is no independent evidence for that diagnosis. On the evening of March 3, Johnson attended a party in his honor he drank heavily. Hung over the following morning at the Capitol, he asked Vice President Hamlin for some whiskey. Hamlin produced a bottle, and Johnson took two stiff drinks, stating I need all the strength for the occasion I can have. In the Senate Chamber, Johnson delivered a rambling address as Lincoln, the Congress, and dignitaries looked on. Almost incoherent at times, he finally meandered to a halt, whereupon Hamlin hastily swore him in as vice president. Lincoln, who had watched sadly during the debacle, was sworn in, and delivered his acclaimed Second Inaugural Address. In the weeks after the inauguration, Johnson only presided over the Senate briefly, and hid from public ridicule at the Maryland home of a friend, Francis Preston Blair. When he did return to Washington, it was with the intent of leaving for Tennessee to reestablish his family in Greeneville. Instead, he remained after word came that General Ulysses S. Grant had captured the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, presaging the end of the war. Lincoln stated, in response to criticism of Johnsons behavior, that I have known Andy Johnson for many years he made a bad slip the other day, but you need not be scared Andy aint a drunkard. President Accession On the afternoon of April 14, 1865, Lincoln and Johnson met for the first time since the inauguration. Trefousse states that Johnson wanted to induce Lincoln not to be too lenient with traitors GordonReed agrees. Contemporary woodcut of Johnson being sworn in by Chief Justice Chase as Cabinet members look on, April 15, 1865 That night, President Lincoln was shot and mortally wounded by John Wilkes Booth, a Confederate sympathizer. The shooting of the President was part of a conspiracy to assassinate Lincoln, Johnson, and Seward the same night. Seward barely survived his wounds, while Johnson escaped attack as his wouldbe assassin, George Atzerodt, got drunk instead of killing the vice president. Leonard J. Farwell, a fellow boarder at the Kirkwood House, awoke Johnson with news of Lincolns shooting at Fords Theatre. Johnson rushed to the Presidents deathbed, where he remained a short time, on his return promising, They shall suffer for this. They shall suffer for this. Lincoln died at 722am the next morning Johnsons swearing in occurred between 10 and 11am with Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase presiding in the presence of most of the Cabinet. Johnsons demeanor was described by the newspapers as solemn and dignified. Some Cabinet members had last seen Johnson, apparently drunk, at the inauguration. At noon, Johnson conducted his first Cabinet meeting in the Treasury Secretarys office, and asked all members to remain in their positions. The events of the assassination resulted in speculation, then and subsequently, concerning Johnson and what the conspirators might have intended for him. In the vain hope of having his life spared after his capture, Atzerodt spoke much about the conspiracy, but did not say anything to indicate that the plotted assassination of Johnson was merely a ruse. Conspiracy theorists point to the fact that on the day of the assassination, Booth came to the Kirkwood House and left one of his cards. This object was received by Johnsons private secretary, William A. Browning, with an inscription, Dont wish to disturb you. Are you at home J. Wilkes Booth. Johnson presided with dignity over Lincolns funeral ceremonies in Washington, before his predecessors body was sent home to Springfield, Illinois, for burial. Shortly after Lincolns death, Union General William T. Sherman reported he had, without consulting Washington, reached an armistice agreement with Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston for the surrender of Confederate forces in North Carolina in exchange for the existing state government remaining in power, with private property rights to be respected. This did not even acknowledge the freedom of those in slavery. This was not acceptable to Johnson or the Cabinet who sent word for Sherman to secure the surrender without making political deals, which he did. Further, Johnson placed a 100,000 bounty on Confederate President Davis, then a fugitive, which gave him the reputation of a man who would be tough on the South. More controversially, he permitted the execution of Mary Surratt for her part in Lincolns assassination. Surratt was executed with three others, including Atzerodt, on July 7, 1865. Reconstruction Background Upon taking office, Johnson faced the question of what to do with the Confederacy. President Lincoln had authorized loyalist governments in Virginia, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Tennessee as the Union came to control large parts of those states and advocated a ten percent plan that would allow elections after ten percent of the voters in any state took an oath of future loyalty to the Union. Congress considered this too lenient its own plan, requiring a majority of voters to take the loyalty oath, passed both houses in 1864, but Lincoln pocket vetoed it. Johnson had three goals in Reconstruction. He sought a speedy restoration of the states, on the grounds that they had never truly left the Union, and thus should again be recognized once loyal citizens formed a government. To Johnson, AfricanAmerican suffrage was a delay and a distraction it had always been a state responsibility to decide who should vote. Second, political power in the Southern states should pass from the planter class to his beloved plebeians. Johnson feared that the freedmen, many of whom were still economically bound to their former masters, might vote at their direction. Johnsons third priority was election in his own right in 1868, a feat no one who had succeeded a deceased president had managed to accomplish, attempting to secure a Democratic anti Congressional Reconstruction coalition in the South. The Republicans had formed a number of factions. The Radical Republicans sought voting and other civil rights for African Americans. They believed that the freedmen could be induced to vote Republican in gratitude for emancipation, and that black votes could keep the Republicans in power and Southern Democrats, including former rebels, out of influence. They believed that top Confederates should be punished. The Moderate Republicans sought to keep the Democrats out of power at a national level, and prevent former rebels from resuming power. They were not as enthusiastic about the idea of AfricanAmerican suffrage as their Radical colleagues, either because of their own local political concerns, or because they believed that the freedman would be likely to cast his vote badly. Northern Democrats favored the unconditional restoration of the Southern states. They did not support AfricanAmerican suffrage, which might threaten Democratic control in the South. Presidential Reconstruction Johnson was initially left to devise a Reconstruction policy without legislative intervention, as Congress was not due to meet again until December 1865. Radical Republicans told the President that the Southern states were economically in a state of chaos and urged him to use his leverage to insist on rights for freedmen as a condition of restoration to the Union. But Johnson, with the support of other officials including Seward, insisted that the franchise was a state, not a federal matter. The Cabinet was divided on the issue. Johnsons first Reconstruction actions were two proclamations, with the unanimous backing of his Cabinet, on May 29. One recognized the Virginia government led by provisional Governor Francis Pierpont. The second provided amnesty for all exrebels except those holding property valued at 20,000 or more it also appointed a temporary governor for North Carolina and authorized elections. Neither of these proclamations included provisions regarding black suffrage or freedmens rights. The President ordered constitutional conventions in other former rebel states. As Southern states began the process of forming governments, Johnsons policies received considerable public support in the North, which he took as unconditional backing for quick reinstatement of the South. While he received such support from the white South, he underestimated the determination of Northerners to ensure that the war had not been fought for nothing. It was important, in Northern public opinion, that the South acknowledge its defeat, that slavery be ended, and that the lot of African Americans be improved. Voting rights were less important after all, only a handful of Northern states gave AfricanAmerican men the right to vote on the same basis as whites, and in late 1865, Connecticut, Wisconsin, and Minnesota voted down AfricanAmerican suffrage proposals by large margins. Northern public opinion tolerated Johnsons inaction on black suffrage as an experiment, to be allowed if it quickened Southern acceptance of defeat. Instead, white Southerners felt emboldened. A number of Southern states passed Black Codes, binding AfricanAmerican laborers to farms on annual contracts they could not quit, and allowing law enforcement at whim to arrest them for vagrancy and rent out their labor. Most Southerners elected to Congress were former Confederates, with the most prominent being Georgia Senatordesignate and former Confederate vice president Alexander Stephens. Congress assembled in early December 1865 Johnsons conciliatory annual message to them was well received. Nevertheless, Congress refused to seat the Southern legislators and established a committee to recommend appropriate Reconstruction legislation. Northerners were outraged at the idea of unrepentant Confederate leaders, such as Stephens, rejoining the federal government at a time when emotional wounds from the war remained raw. They saw the Black Codes placing African Americans in a position barely above slavery. Republicans also feared that restoration of the Southern states would return the Democrats to power. In addition, according to David O. Stewart in his book on Johnsons impeachment, the violence and poverty that oppressed the South would galvanize the opposition to Johnson. Break with the Republicans 1866 Congress was reluctant to confront the President, and initially only sought to finetune Johnsons policies towards the South. According to Trefousse, If there was a time when Johnson could have come to an agreement with the moderates of the Republican Party, it was the period following the return of Congress. The President was unhappy about the provocative actions of the Southern states, and about the continued control by the antebellum elite there, but made no statement publicly, believing that Southerners had a right to act as they did, even if it was unwise to do so. By late January 1866, he was convinced that winning a showdown with the Radical Republicans was necessary to his political plans both for the success of Reconstruction and for reelection in 1868. He would have preferred that the conflict arise over the legislative efforts to enfranchise African Americans in the District of Columbia, a proposal that had been defeated overwhelmingly in an allwhite referendum. A bill to accomplish this passed the House of Representatives, but to Johnsons disappointment, stalled in the Senate before he could veto it. Thomas Nast cartoon of Johnson disposing of the Freedmens Bureau as African Americans go flying Illinois Senator Lyman Trumbull, leader of the Moderate Republicans and Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, was anxious to reach an understanding with the President. He ushered through Congress a bill extending the Freedmens Bureau beyond its scheduled abolition in 1867, and the first Civil Rights Bill, to grant citizenship to the freedmen. Trumbull met several times with Johnson, and was convinced the President would sign the measures . In fact, the President opposed both bills as infringements on state sovereignty. Additionally, both of Trumbulls bills were unpopular among white Southerners, whom Johnson hoped to include in his new party. Johnson vetoed the Freedmans Bureau bill on February 18, 1866, to the delight of white Southerners and the puzzled anger of Republican legislators. He considered himself vindicated when a move to override his veto failed in the Senate the following day. Johnson believed that the Radicals would now be isolated and defeated, and that the Moderate Republicans would form behind him he did not understand that Moderates too wanted to see African Americans treated fairly. On February 22, 1866, Washingtons Birthday, Johnson gave an impromptu speech to supporters who had marched to the White House and called for an address in honor of the first president. In his hourlong speech, he instead referred to himself over 200 times. More damagingly, he also spoke of men... still opposed to the Union to whom he could not extend the hand of friendship he gave to the South. When called upon by the crowd to say who they were, Johnson named Pennsylvania Congressman Thaddeus Stevens, Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner, and abolitionist Wendell Phillips, and accused them of plotting his assassination. Republicans viewed the address as a declaration of war, while one Democratic ally estimated Johnsons speech cost the party 200,000 votes in the 1866 congressional midterm elections. Although strongly urged by Moderates to sign the Civil Rights Bill, Johnson broke decisively with them by vetoing it on March 27. In his veto message, he objected to the measure because it conferred citizenship on the freedmen at a time when 11 out of 36 states were unrepresented in the Congress, and that it discriminated in favor of African Americans and against whites. Within three weeks, Congress had overridden his veto, the first time that had been done on a major bill in American history. The veto of the Civil Rights Act of 1866, often seen as a key mistake of Johnsons presidency, convinced Moderates there was no hope of working with him. Historian Eric Foner in his volume on Reconstruction views it as the most disastrous miscalculation of his political career. According to Stewart, the veto was for many his defining blunder, setting a tone of perpetual confrontation with Congress that prevailed for the rest of his presidency. Congress also proposed the Fourteenth Amendment to the states. Written by Trumbull and others, it was sent for ratification by state legislatures in a process in which the president plays no part, though Johnson opposed it. The amendment was designed to put the key provisions of the Civil Rights Act into the Constitution, but also went further. The amendment extended citizenship to every person born in the United States , penalized states that did not give the vote to freedmen, and most importantly, created new federal civil rights that could be protected by federal courts. It also guaranteed that the federal debt would be paid and forbade repayment of Confederate war debts. Further, it disqualified many former Confederates from office, although the disability could be removed by Congress, not the president. Both houses passed the Freedmens Bureau Act a second time, and again the President vetoed it this time, the veto was overridden. By the summer of 1866, when Congress finally adjourned, Johnsons method of restoring states to the Union by executive fiat, without safeguards for the freedmen, was in deep trouble. His home state of Tennessee ratified the Fourteenth Amendment despite the Presidents opposition. When Tennessee did so, Congress immediately seated its proposed delegation, embarrassing Johnson. Efforts to compromise failed, and a political war ensued between the united Republicans on one side, and on the other, Johnson and his allies in the Democratic Party, North and South. He called a convention of the National Union Party. Republicans had returned to using their previous identifier Johnson intended to use the discarded name to unite his supporters and gain election to a fullterm, in 1868. The battleground was the election of 1866 Southern states were not allowed to vote. Johnson campaigned vigorously, undertaking a public speaking tour, known as the Swing Around the Circle. The trip, including speeches in Chicago, St. Louis, Indianapolis and Columbus, proved politically disastrous, with the President making controversial comparisons between himself and Christ, and engaging in arguments with hecklers. These exchanges were attacked as beneath the dignity of the presidency. The Republicans won by a landslide, increasing their twothirds majority in Congress, and made plans to control Reconstruction. Johnson blamed the Democrats for giving only lukewarm support to the National Union movement. Radical Reconstruction Even with the Republican victory in November 1866, Johnson considered himself in a strong position. The Fourteenth Amendment had been ratified by none of the Southern or border states except Tennessee, and had been rejected in Kentucky, Delaware, and Maryland. As the amendment required ratification by threequarters of the states to become part of the Constitution, he believed the deadlock would be broken in his favor, leading to his election in 1868. Once it reconvened in December 1866, an energized Congress began passing legislation, often over a presidential veto this included the District of Columbia voting bill. Congress admitted Nebraska to the Union over a veto, and the Republicans gained two senators and a state that promptly ratified the amendment. Johnsons veto of a bill for statehood for Colorado Territory was sustained enough senators agreed that a district with a population of 30,000 was not yet worthy of statehood to win the day. In January 1867, Congressman Stevens introduced legislation to dissolve the Southern state governments and reconstitute them into five military districts, under martial law. The states would begin again by holding constitutional conventions. African Americans could vote for or become delegates former Confederates could not. In the legislative process, Congress added to the bill that restoration to the Union would follow the states ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment, and completion of the process of adding it to the Constitution. Johnson and the Southerners attempted a compromise, whereby the South would agree to a modified version of the amendment without the disqualification of former Confederates, and for limited black suffrage. The Republicans insisted on the full language of the amendment, and the deal fell through. Although Johnson could have pocket vetoed the First Reconstruction Act as it was presented to him less than ten days before the end of the ThirtyNinth Congress, he chose to veto it directly on March 2, 1867 Congress overruled him the same day. Also on March 2, Congress passed the Tenure of Office Act over the Presidents veto, in response to statements during the Swing Around the Circle that he planned to fire Cabinet secretaries who did not agree with him. This bill, requiring Senate approval for the firing of Cabinet members during the tenure of the president who appointed them and for one month afterwards, was immediately controversial, with some senators doubting that it was constitutional or that its terms applied to Johnson, whose key Cabinet officers were Lincoln holdovers. Impeachment The Situation, a Harpers Weekly editorial cartoon shows Secretary of War Stanton aiming a cannon labeled Congress to defeat Johnson. The rammer is Tenure of Office Bill and cannonballs on the floor are Justice. Secretary of War Edwin Stanton was an able and hardworking man, but difficult to deal with. Johnson both admired and was exasperated by his War Secretary, who, in combination with General of the Army Grant, worked to undermine the presidents Southern policy from within his own administration. Johnson considered firing Stanton, but respected him for his wartime service as secretary. Stanton, for his part, feared allowing Johnson to appoint his successor and refused to resign, despite his public disagreements with his president. The new Congress met for a few weeks in March 1867, then adjourned, leaving the House Committee on the Judiciary behind, charged with reporting back to the full House whether there were grounds for Johnson to be impeached. This committee duly met, examined the Presidents bank accounts, and summoned members of the Cabinet to testify. When a federal court released former Confederate president Davis on bail on May 13 , the committee investigated whether the President had impeded the prosecution. It learned that Johnson was eager to have Davis tried. A bipartisan majority of the committee voted down impeachment charges the committee adjourned on June 3. Later in June, Johnson and Stanton battled over the question of whether the military officers placed in command of the South could override the civil authorities. The President had Attorney General Henry Stanbery issue an opinion backing his position that they could not. Johnson sought to pin down Stanton either as for, and thus endorsing Johnsons position, or against, showing himself to be opposed to his president and the rest of the Cabinet. Stanton evaded the point in meetings and written communications. When Congress reconvened in July, it passed a Reconstruction Act against Johnsons position, waited for his veto, overruled it, and went home. In addition to clarifying the powers of the generals, the legislation also deprived the President of control over the Army in the South. With Congress in recess until November, Johnson decided to fire Stanton and relieve one of the military commanders, General Philip Sheridan, who had dismissed the governor of Texas and installed a replacement with little popular support. Johnson was initially deterred by a strong objection from Grant, but on August 5, the President demanded Stantons resignation the secretary refused to quit with Congress out of session. Johnson then suspended him pending the next meeting of Congress as permitted under the Tenure of Office Act Grant agreed to serve as temporary replacement while continuing to lead the Army. Grant, under protest, followed Johnsons order transferring Sheridan and another of the district commanders, Daniel Sickles, who had angered Johnson by firmly following Congresss plan. The President also issued a proclamation pardoning most Confederates, exempting those who held office under the Confederacy, or who had served in federal office before the war and had breached their oaths. Although Republicans expressed anger with his actions, the 1867 elections generally went Democratic. No seats in Congress were directly elected in the polling, but the Democrats took control of the Ohio General Assembly, allowing them to defeat for reelection one of Johnsons strongest opponents, Senator Benjamin Wade. Voters in Ohio, Connecticut, and Minnesota turned down propositions to grant African Americans the vote. The adverse results momentarily put a stop to Republican calls to impeach Johnson, who was elated by the elections. Nevertheless, once Congress met in November, the Judiciary Committee reversed itself and passed a resolution of impeachment against Johnson. After much debate about whether anything the President had done was a high crime or misdemeanor, the standard under the Constitution, the resolution was defeated by the House of Representatives on December 7, 1867, by a vote of 57 in favor to 108 opposed. Johnson notified Congress of Stantons suspension and Grants interim appointment. In January 1868, the Senate disapproved of his action, and reinstated Stanton, contending the President had violated the Tenure of Office Act. Grant stepped aside over Johnsons objection, causing a complete break between them. Johnson then dismissed Stanton and appointed Lorenzo Thomas to replace him. Stanton refused to leave his office, and on February 24, 1868, the House impeached the President for intentionally violating the Tenure of Office Act, by a vote of 128 to 47. The House subsequently adopted eleven articles of impeachment, for the most part alleging that he had violated the Tenure of Office Act, and had questioned the legitimacy of Congress. Theodore R. Davis illustration of Johnsons impeachment trial in the United States Senate, published in Harpers Weekly On March 5, 1868, the impeachment trial began in the Senate and lasted almost three months Congressmen George S. Boutwell, Benjamin Butler and Thaddeus Stevens acted as managers for the House, or prosecutors, and William M. Evarts, Benjamin R. Curtis and former Attorney General Stanbery were Johnsons counsel Chief Justice Chase served as presiding judge. The defense relied on the provision of the Tenure of Office Act that made it applicable only to appointees of the current administration. Since Lincoln had appointed Stanton, the defense maintained Johnson had not violated the act, and also argued that the President had the right to test the constitutionality of an act of Congress. Johnsons counsel insisted that he make no appearance at the trial, nor publicly comment about the proceedings, and except for a pair of interviews in April, he complied. Johnson maneuvered to gain an acquittal for example, he pledged to Iowa Senator James W. Grimes that he would not interfere with Congresss Reconstruction efforts. Grimes reported to a group of Moderates, many of whom voted for acquittal, that he believed the President would keep his word. Johnson also promised to install the respected John Schofield as War Secretary. Kansas Senator Edmund G. Ross received assurances that the new, Radicalinfluenced constitutions ratified in South Carolina and Arkansas would be transmitted to the Congress without delay, an action which would give him and other senators political cover to vote for acquittal. One reason senators were reluctant to remove the President was that his successor would have been Ohio Senator Wade, the president pro tempore of the Senate. Wade, a lame duck who left office in early 1869, was a Radical who supported such measures as womens suffrage, placing him beyond the pale politically in much of the nation. Additionally, a President Wade was seen as an obstacle to Grants ambitions. With the dealmaking, Johnson was confident of the result in advance of the verdict, and in the days leading up to the ballot, newspapers reported that Stevens and his Radicals had given up. On May 16, the Senate voted on the 11th article of impeachment, accusing Johnson of firing Stanton in violation of the Tenure of Office of Act once the Senate had overturned his suspension. Thirtyfive senators voted guilty and 19 not guilty, thus falling short by a single vote of the twothirds majority required for conviction under the Constitution. Seven Republicans Senators Grimes, Ross, Trumbull, William Pitt Fessenden, Joseph S. Fowler, John B. Henderson, and Peter G. Van Winkle voted to acquit the President. With Stevens bitterly disappointed at the result, the Senate then adjourned for the Republican National Convention Grant was nominated for president. The Senate returned on May 26 and voted on the second and third articles, with identical 35 19 results. Faced with those results, Johnsons opponents gave up and dismissed proceedings. Stanton relinquished his office on May 26, and the Senate subsequently confirmed Schofield. When Johnson renominated Stanbery to return to his position as Attorney General after his service as a defense manager, the Senate refused to confirm him. Allegations were made at the time and again later that bribery dictated the outcome of the trial. Even when it was in progress, Representative Butler began an investigation, held contentious hearings, and issued a report, unendorsed by any other congressman. Butler focused on a New York based Astor House Group, supposedly led by political boss and editor Thurlow Weed. This organization was said to have raised large sums of money from whiskey interests through Cincinnati lawyer Charles Woolley to bribe senators to acquit Johnson. Butler went so far as to imprison Woolley in the Capitol building when he refused to answer questions, but failed to prove bribery. Foreign policy Soon after taking office as president, Johnson reached an accord with Secretary of State William H. Seward that there would be no change in foreign policy. In practice, this meant that Seward would continue to run things as he had under Lincoln. Seward and Lincoln had been rivals for the nomination in 1860 the victor hoped that Seward would succeed him as president in 1869. At the time of Johnsons accession, the French had intervened in Mexico, sending troops there. While many politicians had indulged in saberrattling over the Mexican matter, Seward preferred quiet diplomacy, warning the French through diplomatic channels that their presence in Mexico was not acceptable. Although the President preferred a more aggressive approach, Seward persuaded him to follow his lead. In April 1866, the French government informed Seward that its troops would be brought home in stages, to conclude by November 1867. Seward was an expansionist, and sought opportunities to gain territory for the United States. By 1867, the Russian government saw its North American colony as a financial liability, and feared losing control as American settlement reached there. It instructed its minister in Washington, Baron Eduard de Stoeckl, to negotiate a sale. De Stoeckl did so deftly, getting Seward to raise his offer from 5 million to 7 million, and then getting 200,000 added by raising various objections. This sum of 7.2 million is equivalent to in presentday terms. On March 30, 1867, de Stoeckl and Seward signed the treaty, working quickly as the Senate was about to adjourn. Johnson and Seward took the signed document to the Presidents Room in the Capitol, only to be told there was no time to deal with the matter before adjournment. The President summoned the Senate into session to meet on April 1 that body approved the treaty, 37 2. Emboldened by his success in Alaska, Seward sought acquisitions elsewhere. His only success was staking an American claim to uninhabited Wake Island in the Pacific, which would be officially claimed by the U.S. in 1898. He came close with the Danish West Indies as Denmark agreed to sell and the local population approved the transfer in a plebiscite, but the Senate never voted on the treaty and it expired. Another treaty that fared badly was the JohnsonClarendon convention, negotiated in settlement of the Alabama Claims, for damages to American shipping from Britishbuilt Confederate raiders. Negotiated by the United States Minister to Britain, former Maryland senator Reverdy Johnson, in late 1868, it was ignored by the Senate during the remainder of the Presidents term. The treaty was rejected after he left office, and the Grant administration later negotiated considerably better terms from Britain. Administration and Cabinet Judicial appointments Johnson appointed nine Article III federal judges during his presidency, all to United States district courts he did not appoint a justice to serve on the Supreme Court. In April 1866, he nominated Henry Stanbery to fill the vacancy left with the death of John Catron, but Congress eliminated the seat to prevent the appointment, and to ensure that he did not get to make any appointments eliminated the next vacancy as well, providing that the court would shrink by one justice when one next departed from office. Johnson appointed his Greeneville crony, Samuel Milligan, to the United States Court of Claims, where he served from 1868 until his death in 1874. Reforms initiated In June 1866, Johnson signed the Southern Homestead Act into law, believing that the legislation would assist poor whites. Around 28,000 land claims were successfully patented, although few former slaves benefitted from the law, fraud was rampant, and much of the best land was offlimits reserved for grants to veterans or railroads. In June 1868, Johnson signed an eighthour law passed by Congress that established an eighthour workday for laborers and mechanics employed by the Federal Government. Although Johnson told members of a Workingmens party delegation in Baltimore that he could not directly commit himself to an eighthour day, he nevertheless told the same delegation that he greatly favoured the shortest number of hours consistent with the interests of all. According to Richard F. Selcer, however, the good intentions behind the law were immediately frustrated as wages were cut by 20. Completion of term Johnson sought nomination by the 1868 Democratic National Convention in New York in July 1868. He remained very popular among Southern whites, and boosted that popularity by issuing, just before the convention, a pardon ending the possibility of criminal proceedings against any Confederate not already indicted, meaning that only Davis and a few others still might face trial. On the first ballot, Johnson was second to former Ohio representative George H. Pendleton, who had been his Democratic opponent for vice president in 1864. Johnsons support was mostly from the South, and fell away as the ballots passed. On the 22nd ballot, former New York governor Horatio Seymour was nominated, and the President received only four votes, all from Tennessee. The conflict with Congress continued. Johnson sent Congress proposals for amendments to limit the president to a single sixyear term and make the president and the Senate directly elected, and for term limits for judges. Congress took no action on them. When the President was slow to officially report ratifications of the Fourteenth Amendment by the new Southern legislatures, Congress passed a bill, again over his veto, requiring him to do so within ten days of receipt. He still delayed as much as he could, but was required, in July 1868, to report the ratifications making the amendment part of the Constitution. Farewell to all my greatness Harpers Weekly cartoon mocking Johnson on leaving office Seymours operatives sought Johnsons support, but he long remained silent on the presidential campaign. It was not until October, with the vote already having taken place in some states, that he mentioned Seymour at all, and he never endorsed him. Nevertheless, Johnson regretted Grants victory, in part because of their animus from the Stanton affair. In his annual message to Congress in December, Johnson urged the repeal of the Tenure of Office Act and told legislators that had they admitted their Southern colleagues in 1865, all would have been well. He celebrated his 60th birthday in late December with a party for several hundred children, though not including those of Presidentelect Grant, who did not allow his to go. On Christmas Day 1868, Johnson issued a final amnesty, this one covering everyone, including Davis. He also issued, in his final months in office, pardons for crimes, including one for Dr. Samuel Mudd, controversially convicted of involvement in the Lincoln assassination and imprisoned in Fort Jefferson on Floridas Dry Tortugas. On March 3, the President hosted a large public reception at the White House on his final full day in office. Grant had made it known that he was unwilling to ride in the same carriage as Johnson, as was customary, and Johnson refused to go to the inauguration at all. Despite an effort by Seward to prompt a change of mind, he spent the morning of March 4 finishing lastminute business, and then shortly after noon rode from the White House to the home of a friend. Postpresidency Senator Andrew Johnson in 1875 After leaving the presidency, Johnson remained for some weeks in Washington, then returned to Greeneville for the first time in eight years. He was honored with large public celebrations along the way, especially in Tennessee, where cities hostile to him during the war hung out welcome banners. He had arranged to purchase a large farm near Greeneville to live on after his presidency. Some expected Johnson to seek to be Tennessees governor again or to attempt a return to the Senate, others that he would become a railroad executive. Johnson found Greeneville boring, and his private life was embittered by the suicide of his son Robert in 1869. Seeking vindication for himself, and revenge against his political enemies, he launched a Senate bid soon after returning home. Tennessee had gone Republican, but court rulings restoring the vote to some whites and the violence of the Ku Klux Klan kept down the AfricanAmerican vote, leading to a Democratic victory in the legislative elections in August 1869. Johnson was seen as a likely victor in the Senate election, although hated by Radical Republicans, and also by some Democrats because of his wartime activities. Although he was at one point within a single vote of victory in the legislatures balloting, the Republicans eventually elected Henry Cooper over Johnson, 54 51. In 1872, there was a special election for an atlarge congressional seat for Tennessee Johnson initially sought the Democratic nomination, but when he saw that it would go to former Confederate general Benjamin F. Cheatham, decided to run as an independent. The former president was defeated, finishing third, but the split in the Democratic Party defeated Cheatham in favor of an old Johnson Unionist ally, Horace Maynard. In 1873, Johnson contracted cholera during an epidemic but recovered that year he lost about 73,000, when the First National Bank of Washington went under, though he was eventually repaid much of the sum. He began looking towards the next Senate election, to take place in the legislature in early 1875. Johnson began to woo the farmers Grange movement with his Jeffersonian leanings, he easily gained their support. He spoke throughout the state in his final campaign tour. Few African Americans outside the large towns were now able to vote as Reconstruction faded in Tennessee, setting a pattern that would be repeated in the other Southern states the white domination would last almost a century. In the Tennessee legislative elections in August, the Democrats elected 92 legislators to the Republicans eight, and Johnson went to Nashville for the legislative session. When the balloting for the Senate seat began on January 20, 1875, he led with 30 votes, but did not have the required majority as three former Confederate generals, one former colonel, and a former Democratic congressman split the vote with him. Johnsons opponents tried to agree on a single candidate who might gain majority support and defeat him, but failed, and he was elected on January 26 on the 54th ballot, with a margin of a single vote. Nashville erupted in rejoicing remarked Johnson, Thank God for the vindication. Johnsons comeback garnered national attention, with the St. Louis Republican calling it, the most magnificent personal triumph which the history of American politics can show. At his swearingin in the Senate on March 5, 1875, he was greeted with flowers and sworn in with his predecessor as vice president, Hamlin, by that offices current incumbent, Henry Wilson, who as senator had voted for his ousting. Many Republicans ignored Senator Johnson, though some, such as Ohios John Sherman , shook his hand. Johnson remains the only former president to serve in the Senate. He spoke only once in the short session, on March 22 lambasting President Grant for his use of federal troops in support of Louisianas Reconstruction government. The former president asked, How far off is military despotism and concluded his speech, may God bless this people and God save the Constitution. Death Johnson returned home after the special session concluded. In late July, convinced some of his opponents were defaming him in the Ohio gubernatorial race, he decided to travel there to give speeches. He began the trip on July 28, and broke the journey at his daughter Marys farm near Elizabethton, where his daughter Martha was also staying. That evening he suffered a stroke, but refused medical treatment until the next day, when he did not improve and two doctors were sent for from Elizabethton. He seemed to respond to their ministrations, but suffered another stroke on the evening of July 30, and died early the following morning at the age of 66. President Grant had the painful duty of announcing the death of the only surviving past president. Northern newspapers, in their obituaries, tended to focus on Johnsons loyalty during the war, while Southern ones paid tribute to his actions as president. Johnsons funeral was held on August 3 in Greeneville. He was buried with his body wrapped in an American flag and a copy of the U.S. Constitution placed under his head, according to his wishes. The burial ground was dedicated as the Andrew Johnson National Cemetery in 1906, and with his home and tailors shop, is part of the Andrew Johnson National Historic Site. Historical view and legacy According to Castel, historians Johnsons presidency have tended to concentrate to the exclusion of practically everything else upon his role in that titanic event Reconstruction. Through the remainder of the 19th century, there were few historical evaluations of Johnson and his presidency. Memoirs from Northerners who had dealt with him, such as former vice president Henry Wilson and Maine Senator James G. Blaine, depicted him as an obstinate boor who tried to favor the South in Reconstruction, but who was frustrated by Congress. According to historian Howard K. Beale in his journal article about the historiography of Reconstruction, Men of the postwar decades were more concerned with justifying their own position than they were with painstaking search for truth. Thus congressman and historian Hilary Herbert and his corroborators presented a Southern indictment of Northern policies, and Henry Wilsons history was a brief for the North. The turn of the 20th century saw the first significant historical evaluations of Johnson. Leading the wave was Pulitzer Prizewinning historian James Ford Rhodes, who wrote of the former president Rhodes ascribed Johnsons faults to his personal weaknesses, and blamed him for the problems of the postbellum South. Other early 20thcentury historians, such as John Burgess, Woodrow Wilson and William Dunning, all Southerners, concurred with Rhodes, believing Johnson flawed and politically inept, but concluding that he had tried to carry out Lincolns plans for the South in good faith. Author and journalist Jay Tolson suggests that Wilson depictReconstruction as a vindictive program that hurt even repentant southerners while benefiting northern opportunists, the socalled Carpetbaggers, and cynical white southerners, or Scalawags, who exploited alliances with blacks for political gain. The grave of Andrew Johnson, Greeneville, Tennessee Even as Rhodes and his school wrote, another group of historians was setting out on the full rehabilitation of Johnson, using for the first time primary sources such as his papers, provided by his daughter Martha before her death in 1901, and the diaries of Johnsons Navy Secretary, Gideon Welles, first published in 1911. The resulting volumes, such as David Miller DeWitts The Impeachment and Trial of President Andrew Johnson , presented him far more favorably than they did those who had sought to oust him. In James Schoulers 1913 History of the Reconstruction Period , the author accused Rhodes of being quite unfair to Johnson, though agreeing that the former president had created many of his own problems through inept political moves. These works had an effect although historians continued to view Johnson as having deep flaws which sabotaged his presidency, they saw his Reconstruction policies as fundamentally correct. Castel writes Beale wondered in 1940, is it not time that we studied the history of Reconstruction without first assuming, at least subconsciously, that carpetbaggers and Southern white Republicans were wicked, that Negroes were illiterate incompetents, and that the whole white South owes a debt of gratitude to the restorers of white supremacy Despite these doubts, the favorable view of Johnson survived for a time. In 1942, Van Heflin portrayed the former president as a fighter for democracy in the Hollywood film Tennessee Johnson . In 1948, a poll of his colleagues by historian Arthur M. Schlesinger deemed Johnson among the average presidents in 1956, one by Clinton L. Rossiter named him as one of the neargreat Chief Executives. Foner notes that at the time of these surveys, the Reconstruction era that followed the Civil War was regarded as a time of corruption and misgovernment caused by granting black men the right to vote. Earlier historians, including Beale, believed that money drove events, and had seen Reconstruction as an economic struggle. They also accepted, for the most part, that reconciliation between North and South should have been the top priority of Reconstruction. In the 1950s, historians began to focus on the AfricanAmerican experience as central to Reconstruction. They rejected completely any claim of black inferiority, which had marked many earlier historical works, and saw the developing Civil Rights Movement as a second Reconstruction some writers stated they hoped their work on the postbellum era would advance the cause of civil rights. These authors sympathized with the Radical Republicans for their desire to help the African American, and saw Johnson as callous towards the freedman. In a number of works from 1956 onwards by such historians as Fawn Brodie, the former president was depicted as a successful saboteur of efforts to better the freedmans lot. These volumes included major biographies of Stevens and Stanton. Reconstruction was increasingly seen as a noble effort to integrate the freed slaves into society. In the early 21st century, Johnson is among those commonly mentioned as the worst presidents in U.S. history. According to historian Glenn W. Lafantasie, who believes Buchanan the worst president, Johnson is a particular favorite for the bottom of the pile because of his impeachment... his complete mishandling of Reconstruction policy... his bristling personality, and his enormous sense of selfimportance. Tolson suggests that Johnson is now scorned for having resisted Radical Republican policies aimed at securing the rights and wellbeing of the newly emancipated AfricanAmericans. GordonReed notes that Johnson, along with his contemporaries Pierce and Buchanan, are generally listed among the five worst presidents, but states, there have never been more difficult times in the life of this nation. The problems these men had to confront were enormous. It would have taken a succession of Lincolns to do them justice. Trefousse considers Johnsons legacy to be the maintenance of white supremacy. His boost to Southern conservatives by undermining Reconstruction was his legacy to the nation, one that would trouble the country for generations to come. GordonReed states of Johnson Notes Explanatory notes References Bibliography Benedict, Michael Les. The impeachment and trial of Andrew Johnson online McKitrick, Eric L. Andrew Johnson and Reconstruction online vol 5 186466 online and vol 6 186672 online Sefton, James E. Andrew Johnson and the uses of constitutional power online Swanson, Ryan A., Andrew Johnson and His Governors An Examination of Failed Reconstruction Leadership, Tennessee Historical Quarterly , 711 pp 16 45. Primary sources External links White House biography Andrew Johnson National Historic Site Andrew Johnson A Resource Guide Library of Congress Essays on Andrew Johnson and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady, from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Life Portrait of Andrew Johnson, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , July 9, 1999 Text of a number of Johnsons speeches at the Miller Center of Public Affairs Andrew Johnson Personal Manuscripts and Letters Shapell Manuscript Foundation Resolutions of Impeachment from the National Archives CategoryAndrew Johnson Category1808 births Category1875 deaths CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of Irish descent CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryBurials in Tennessee CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party state governors of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party United States Senators CategoryDemocratic Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategoryGovernors of Tennessee CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryImpeached Presidents of the United States CategoryLincoln administration cabinet members CategoryMayors of places in Tennessee CategoryMembers of the Tennessee House of Representatives CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Tennessee CategoryNorth Carolina Democrats CategoryPeople from Greeneville, Tennessee CategoryPoliticians from Raleigh, North Carolina CategoryPeople of the Reconstruction Era CategoryPeople of North Carolina in the American Civil War CategoryPeople of Tennessee in the American Civil War CategoryAndrew Johnson family CategoryRepublican Party vice presidential nominees CategorySouthern Unionists in the American Civil War CategoryTailors CategoryPeople associated with the assassination of Abraham Lincoln CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryTennessee city council members CategoryTennessee Democrats CategoryTennessee State Senators CategoryUnion Army generals CategoryUnion political leaders CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1860 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1868 CategoryUnited States Senators from Tennessee CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1864 CategoryDemocratic Party members of the United States House of Representatives Category19thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican slave owners CategoryDeaths from cerebrovascular disease CategoryAmerican whitesupremacists
William Jefferson Clinton is an American politician who served as the 42nd President of the United States from 1993 to 2001. Prior to the presidency, he was the Governor of Arkansas from 1979 to 1981, and again from 1983 to 1992. A member of the Democratic Party, Clinton was ideologically a New Democrat and many of his policies reflected a centrist Third Way political philosophy. Clinton was born and raised in Arkansas and attended Georgetown University, the University of Oxford, and Yale Law School. He met Hillary Rodham at Yale and married her in 1975. After graduating from Yale, Clinton returned to Arkansas and won election as the Attorney General of Arkansas, serving from 1977 to 1979. As Governor of Arkansas, Clinton overhauled the states education system and served as chairman of the National Governors Association. Clinton was elected president in 1992, defeating incumbent Republican opponent George H. W. Bush. At age 46, he became the thirdyoungest president and the first from the Baby Boomer generation. Clinton presided over the longest period of peacetime economic expansion in American history and signed into law the North American Free Trade Agreement, but failed to pass his plan for national health care reform. In the 1994 elections, the Republican Party won unified control of the Congress for the first time in 40 years. In 1996, Clinton became the first Democrat since Franklin D. Roosevelt to be elected to a second full term. Clinton passed welfare reform and the State Childrens Health Insurance Program, as well as financial deregulation measures, including the GrammLeachBliley Act and the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000. In 1998, Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives for matters related to a scandal that involved White House employee Monica Lewinsky. Clinton was acquitted by the Senate in 1999 and proceeded to complete his term in office. During the last three years of Clintons presidency, the Congressional Budget Office reported a budget surplus, the first such surplus since 1969. In foreign policy, Clinton ordered U.S. military intervention in the Bosnian and Kosovo wars, signed the Iraq Liberation Act in opposition to Saddam Hussein, and participated in the 2000 Camp David Summit to advance the Israeli Palestinian peace process. Clinton left office with the highest endofoffice approval rating of any U.S. president since World War II, and he has continually received high ratings in public opinion polls of U.S. presidents. Since leaving office, Clinton has been involved in public speaking and humanitarian work. He created the William J. Clinton Foundation to address international causes, such as the prevention of AIDS and global warming. He has remained active in politics by campaigning for Democratic candidates, including his wifes presidential campaigns and Barack Obamas presidential campaigns. In 2004, Clinton published his autobiography, My Life . In 2009, Clinton was named the United Nations Special Envoy to Haiti and after the 2010 Haiti earthquake, he teamed with George W. Bush to form the Clinton Bush Haiti Fund. Early life and career Clintons childhood home in Hope, Arkansas Clinton was born William Jefferson Blythe III on August 19, 1946, at Julia Chester Hospital in Hope, Arkansas. He was the son of William Jefferson Blythe Jr. , a traveling salesman who had died in an automobile accident three months before his birth, and Virginia Dell Cassidy . His parents married on September 4, 1943, but this union later proved to be bigamous, as Blythe was still married to his third wife. Soon after Bill was born, Virginia traveled to New Orleans to study nursing. She left her son in Hope with her parents Eldridge and Edith Cassidy, who owned and ran a small grocery store. At a time when the southern United States was racially segregated, Clintons grandparents sold goods on credit to people of all races. In 1950, Bills mother returned from nursing school and married Roger Clinton Sr., who owned an automobile dealership in Hot Springs, Arkansas, with his brother and Earl T. Ricks. The family moved to Hot Springs in 1950. Although he immediately assumed use of his stepfathers surname, it was not until Clinton turned fifteen that he formally adopted the surname Clinton as a gesture toward his stepfather. Clinton said that he remembered his stepfather as a gambler and an alcoholic who regularly abused his mother and halfbrother, Roger Clinton Jr., to the point where he intervened multiple times with the threat of violence to protect them. Clinton with his saxophone at the White House in 1996. He began playing the saxophone in elementary school. At one point, Clinton considered pursuing a career in music. In Hot Springs, Clinton attended St. Johns Catholic Elementary School, Ramble Elementary School, and Hot Springs High School, where he was an active student leader, avid reader, and musician. Clinton was in the chorus and played the tenor saxophone, winning first chair in the state bands saxophone section. He briefly considered dedicating his life to music, but as he noted in his autobiography My Life Clinton began an interest in law at Hot Springs High, when he took up the challenge to argue the defense of the ancient Roman Senator Catiline in a mock trial in his Latin class. After a vigorous defense that made use of his budding rhetorical and political skills, he told the Latin teacher Elizabeth Buck that it made him realize that someday he would study law. Clinton has identified two influential moments in his life, both occurring in 1963, that contributed to his decision to become a public figure. One was his visit as a Boys Nation senator to the White House to meet President John F. Kennedy. The other was watching Martin Luther King Jr.s 1963 I Have a Dream speech on TV, which impressed him enough that he later memorized it. College and law school years Georgetown University Clinton ran for president of the Student Council while attending the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University. With the aid of scholarships, Clinton attended the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., receiving a Bachelor of Science in Foreign Service degree in 1968. In 1964 and 1965, Clinton won elections for class president.Robert E. Levin, Bill Clinton The Inside Story , 1992, pages xxiv xxv. From 1964 to 1967, he was an intern and then a clerk in the office of Arkansas Senator J. William Fulbright. While in college, he became a brother of coed service fraternity Alpha Phi Omega and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. Clinton was also a member of the Order of DeMolay,DeMolay Hall Of Fame William Clinton, quote Clinton was initiated into Hot Springs Chapter in Hot Springs, Arkansas, in 1961, where he served as Master Councilor. He received the Chevalier in 1964, and the Legion of Honor in 1979. Clinton was inducted into the DeMolay Hall of Fame on May 1, 1988. a youth group affiliated with Freemasonry, but he never became a Freemason. He is a member of Kappa Kappa Psi honorary band fraternity. Oxford Upon graduating from Georgetown in 1968, Clinton won a Rhodes Scholarship to University College in Oxford, England, where he initially read for a B.Phil. in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics but transferred to a B.Litt. in politics and, ultimately, a B.Phil. in politics. Clinton did not expect the second year because of the draft and he switched programs this type of activity was common among other Rhodes Scholars from his cohort. He had received an offer to study at Yale Law School, Yale University, but he left early to return to the United States and did not receive a degree from Oxford. During his time at Oxford, Clinton befriended fellow American Rhodes Scholar Frank Aller. In 1969, Aller received a draft letter that mandated deployment to the Vietnam War. Allers 1971 suicide had an influential impact on Clinton. British writer and feminist Sara Maitland said of Clinton, I remember Bill and Frank Aller taking me to a pub in Walton Street in the summer term of 1969 and talking to me about the Vietnam War. I knew nothing about it, and when Frank began to describe the napalming of civilians I began to cry. Bill said that feeling bad wasnt good enough. That was the first time I encountered the idea that liberal sensitivities werent enough and you had to do something about such things. He also developed an interest in rugby union, which he played at Oxford. While Clinton was president in 1994, he received an honorary degree and a fellowship from the University of Oxford, specifically for being a doughty and tireless champion of the cause of world peace, having a powerful collaborator in his wife, and for winning general applause for his achievement of resolving the gridlock that prevented an agreed budget. Vietnam War opposition and draft controversy While at Oxford, Clinton also participated in Vietnam War protests and organized an October 1969 Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam event. During the Vietnam War, Clinton received educational draft deferments while he was in England in 1968 and 1969.Neil Hamilton, Presidents A Biographical Dictionary, 2005, p. 367. He was planning to attend law school in the U.S. and was aware that he might lose his draft deferment. Clinton tried unsuccessfully to obtain positions in the National Guard or Air Force, and he then made arrangements to join the Reserve Officers Training Corps program at the University of Arkansas.Steven Gillon, The Pact Bill Clinton, Newt Gingrich, and the Rivalry that Defined a Generation, 2008, p. 21. He subsequently decided not to join the ROTC, saying in a letter to the officer in charge of the program that he opposed the war, but did not think it was honorable to use ROTC, National Guard, or Reserve service to avoid serving in Vietnam. He further stated that because he opposed the war, he would not volunteer to serve in uniform, but would subject himself to the draft, and would serve if selected only as a way to maintain my political viability within the system.New York Times, The 1992 Campaign A Letter by Clinton on His Draft Deferment A War I Opposed and Despised, February 13, 1992. Clinton registered for the draft and received a high number , meaning that those whose birthdays had been drawn as numbers 1 to 310 would have to be drafted before him, making it unlikely that he would be drafted. Colonel Eugene Holmes, the Army officer who had been involved with Clintons ROTC application, suspected that Clinton attempted to manipulate the situation to avoid the draft and avoid serving in uniform. He issued a notarized statement during the 1992 presidential campaign During the 1992 campaign, it was revealed that Clintons uncle had attempted to secure him a position in the Navy Reserve, which would have prevented him from being deployed to Vietnam. This effort was unsuccessful and Clinton said in 1992 that he had been unaware of it until then. Although legal, Clintons actions with respect to the draft and deciding whether to serve in the military were criticized during his first presidential campaign by conservatives and some Vietnam veterans, some of whom charged that he had used Fulbrights influence to avoid military service. Clintons 1992 campaign manager, James Carville, successfully argued that Clintons letter in which he declined to join the ROTC should be made public, insisting that voters, many of whom had also opposed the Vietnam War, would understand and appreciate his position.Public Broadcasting System, Frontline Interview with James Carville, 2000. Law school After Oxford, Clinton attended Yale Law School and earned a Juris Doctor degree in 1973. In 1971, he met fellow law student Hillary Rodham in the Yale Law Library she was a class year ahead of him. They began dating and were soon inseparable. After only about a month, Clinton postponed his plans to be a coordinator for the George McGovern campaign for the 1972 United States presidential election in order to move in with her in California. They married on October 11, 1975, and their only child, Chelsea, was born on February 27, 1980. Clinton eventually moved to Texas with Rodham in 1972 to take a job leading George McGoverns effort there. He spent considerable time in Dallas, at the campaigns local headquarters on Lemmon Avenue, where he had an office. Clinton worked with future twoterm mayor of Dallas Ron Kirk, future governor of Texas Ann Richards, and then unknown television director Steven Spielberg. Early political career Governor of Arkansas After graduating from Yale Law School, Clinton returned to Arkansas and became a law professor at the University of Arkansas. In 1974, he ran for the House of Representatives. Running in a conservative district against incumbent Republican John Paul Hammerschmidt, Clintons campaign was bolstered by the antiRepublican and antiincumbent mood resulting from the Watergate scandal. Hammerschmidt, who had received 77 percent of the vote in 1972, defeated Clinton by only a 52percent to 48percent margin. In 1976, Clinton ran for Arkansas Attorney General. With only minor opposition in the primary and no opposition at all in the general election, Clinton was elected. Newly elected Governor of Arkansas Bill Clinton meets with President Jimmy Carter in 1978, fifteen years before assuming the nations highest office. Clinton was elected Governor of Arkansas in 1978, having defeated the Republican candidate Lynn Lowe, a farmer from Texarkana. At age 32, he became the youngest governor in the country. Due to his youthful appearance, Clinton was often called the Boy Governor. He worked on educational reform and directed the maintenance of Arkansass roads, with wife Hillary leading a successful committee on urban health care reform. However, his term included an unpopular motor vehicle tax and citizens anger over the escape of Cuban refugees detained in Fort Chaffee in 1980. Monroe Schwarzlose of Kingsland in Cleveland County, polled 31percent of the vote against Clinton in the Democratic gubernatorial primary of 1980. Some suggested Schwarzloses unexpected voter turnout foreshadowed Clintons defeat by Republican challenger Frank D. White in the general election that year. As Clinton once joked, he was the youngest exgovernor in the nations history. Clinton joined friend Bruce Lindseys Little Rock law firm of Wright, Lindsey and Jennings. In 1982, he was elected governor a second time and kept the office for ten years. Effective with the 1986 election, Arkansas had changed its gubernatorial term of office from two to four years. During his term, he helped transform Arkansass economy and improved the states educational system. For senior citizens, he removed the sales tax from medications and increased the home propertytax exemption. He became a leading figure among the New Democrats, a group of Democrats who advocated welfare reform, smaller government, and other policies not supported by liberals. Formally organized as the Democratic Leadership Council , the New Democrats argued that in light of President Ronald Reagans landslide victory in 1984, the Democratic Party needed to adopt a more centrist political stance in order to succeed at the national level. Clinton delivered the Democratic response to Reagans 1985 State of the Union Address and served as chair of the National Governors Association from 1986 to 1987, bringing him to an audience beyond Arkansas. In the early 1980s, Clinton made reform of the Arkansas education system a top priority of his gubernatorial administration. The Arkansas Education Standards Committee was chaired by Clintons wife Hillary Rodham Clinton, who was also an attorney as well as the chair of the Legal Services Corporation. The committee transformed Arkansass education system. Proposed reforms included more spending for schools , better opportunities for gifted children, vocational education, higher teachers salaries, more course variety, and compulsory teacher competency exams. The reforms passed in September 1983 after Clinton called a special legislative session the longest in Arkansas history. Many have considered this the greatest achievement of the Clinton governorship. He defeated four Republican candidates for governor Lowe , White , Jonesboro businessmen Woody Freeman , and Sheffield Nelson of Little Rock . Governor and Mrs. Clinton attend the Dinner Honoring the Nations Governors in the White House with President Ronald Reagan and first lady Nancy Reagan, 1987. Also in the 1980s, The Clintons personal and business affairs included transactions that became the basis of the Whitewater controversy investigation, which later dogged his presidential administration. After extensive investigation over several years, no indictments were made against the Clintons related to the years in Arkansas. According to some sources, Clinton was a death penalty opponent in his early years, but he eventually switched positions. During Clintons term, Arkansas performed its first executions since 1964 . As Governor, he oversaw four executions one by electric chair and three by lethal injection. Later, as president, Clinton was the first president to pardon a deathrow inmate since the federal death penalty was reinstated in 1988. 1988 Democratic presidential primaries In 1987, the media speculated that Clinton would enter the Presidential race after incumbent New York Governor Mario Cuomo declined to run and Democratic frontrunner Gary Hart withdrew owing to revelations of marital infidelity. Clinton decided to remain as Arkansas governor .David Maraniss, First in His Class A Biography of Bill Clinton . For the nomination, Clinton endorsed Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis. He gave the nationally televised opening night address at the 1988 Democratic National Convention, but his speech, which was 33 minutes long and twice as long as it was expected to be, was criticized for being too long and poorly delivered. Clinton presented himself as both a moderate and a member of the New Democrat wing of the Democratic Party, and he headed the moderate Democratic Leadership Council in 1990 and 1991. Presidency Countries visited by President Bill Clinton during his terms in office. During his presidency, Clinton advocated for a wide variety of legislation and programs, most of which were enacted into law or implemented by the executive branch. His policies, particularly the North American Free Trade Agreement and welfare reform, have been attributed to a centrist Third Way philosophy of governance. His policy of fiscal conservatism helped to reduce deficits on budgetary matters. Clinton presided over the longest period of peacetime economic expansion in American history. The Congressional Budget Office reported budget surpluses of 69billion in 1998, 126billion in 1999, and 236billion in 2000, during the last three years of Clintons presidency. Over the years of the recorded surplus, the gross national debt rose each year. At the end of the fiscal year for each of the years a surplus was recorded, The U.S. treasury reported a gross debt of 5.413 trillion in 1997, 5.526 trillion in 1998, 5.656 trillion in 1999, and 5.674 trillion in 2000. Over the same period, the Office of Management and Budget reported an end of year gross debt of 5.369 trillion in 1997, 5.478 trillion in 1998, 5.606 in 1999, and 5.629 trillion in 2000. At the end of his presidency, the Clintons moved to Chappaqua, New York in order to satisy a residency requirement for his wife to win election as a U.S. Senator from New York. 1992 presidential campaign In the first primary contest, the Iowa Caucus, Clinton finished a distant third to Iowa Senator Tom Harkin. During the campaign for the New Hampshire primary, reports surfaced that Clinton had engaged in an extramarital affair with Gennifer Flowers. Clinton fell far behind former Massachusetts Senator Paul Tsongas in the New Hampshire polls. Following Super Bowl XXVI, Clinton and his wife Hillary went on 60 Minutes to rebuff the charges. Their television appearance was a calculated risk, but Clinton regained several delegates. He finished second to Tsongas in the New Hampshire primary, but after trailing badly in the polls and coming within single digits of winning, the media viewed it as a victory. News outlets labeled him The Comeback Kid for earning a firm secondplace finish. Winning the big prizes of Florida and Texas and many of the Southern primaries on Super Tuesday gave Clinton a sizable delegate lead. However, former California Governor Jerry Brown was scoring victories and Clinton had yet to win a significant contest outside his native South. With no major Southern state remaining, Clinton targeted New York, which had many delegates. He scored a resounding victory in New York City, shedding his image as a regional candidate. Having been transformed into the consensus candidate, he secured the Democratic Party nomination, finishing with a victory in Jerry Browns home state of California. The Clintons in a White House Christmas portrait, 1993. During the campaign, questions of conflict of interest regarding state business and the politically powerful Rose Law Firm, at which Hillary Rodham Clinton was a partner, arose. Clinton argued the questions were moot because all transactions with the state had been deducted before determining Hillarys firm pay. Further concern arose when Bill Clinton announced that, with Hillary, voters would be getting two presidents for the price of one. Clinton was still the Governor of Arkansas while campaigning for U.S. president, and he returned to his home state to see that Ricky Ray Rector would be executed. After killing a police officer and a civilian, Rector shot himself in the head, leading to what his lawyers said was a state where he could still talk but did not understand the idea of death. According to both Arkansas state law and Federal law, a seriously mentally impaired inmate cannot be executed. The courts disagreed with the allegation of grave mental impairment and allowed the execution. Clintons return to Arkansas for the execution was framed in a New York Times article as a possible political move to counter soft on crime accusations.George Stephanopoulos, All Too Human A Political Education , 1999, Bushs approval ratings were around 80percent during the Gulf War, and he was described as unbeatable. When Bush compromised with Democrats to try to lower Federal deficits, he reneged on his promise not to raise taxes, which hurt his approval rating. Clinton repeatedly condemned Bush for making a promise he failed to keep. By election time, the economy was souring and Bush saw his approval rating plummet to just slightly over 40percent. Finally, conservatives were previously united by anticommunism, but with the end of the Cold War, the party lacked a uniting issue. When Pat Buchanan and Pat Robertson addressed Christian themes at the Republican National Convention with Bush criticizing Democrats for omitting God from their platform many moderates were alienated. Clinton then pointed to his moderate, New Democrat record as governor of Arkansas, though some on the more liberal side of the party remained suspicious. Many Democrats who had supported Ronald Reagan and Bush in previous elections switched their support to Clinton. Clinton and his running mate, Al Gore, toured the country during the final weeks of the campaign, shoring up support and pledging a new beginning. 1992 electoral vote results. Clinton won the 1992 presidential election against Republican incumbent George H. W. Bush and billionaire populist Ross Perot , who ran as an independent on a platform that focused on domestic issues. Bushs steep decline in public approval was a significant part of Clintons success. Clintons victory in the election ended twelve years of Republican rule of the White House and twenty of the previous twentyfour years. The election gave Democrats full control of the United States Congress, the first time one party controlled both the executive and legislative branches since Democrats held the 96th United States Congress during the presidency of Jimmy Carter. First term Clinton was inaugurated as the 42nd President of the United States on January 20, 1993. Less than a month after taking office, he signed the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, which required large employers to allow employees to take unpaid leave for pregnancy or a serious medical condition. This action had bipartisan support, and was popular with the public. Two days after taking office, on January 22, 1993 the 20th anniversary of the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade Clinton reversed restrictions on domestic and international family planning programs that had been imposed by Reagan and Bush.Sharon L. Camp, The Politics of U.S. Population Assistance , in Beyond the Numbers A Reader on Population, Consumption and the Environment , p. 130. Clinton said that abortion should be kept safe, legal, and rare a slogan that had been suggested by University of California, San Diego political scientist Samuel L. Popkin and first used by Clinton in December 1991, while campaigning.Amy Sullivan, The Party Faithful How and Why Democrats Are Closing the God Gap , pp. 91 92. During the eight years of the Clinton administration, the U.S. abortion rate declined by about 18.4 percent.Sullivan, The Party Faithful , pp. 236 37. On February 15, 1993, Clinton made his first address to the nation, announcing his plan to raise taxes to close a budget deficit. Two days later, in a nationally televised address to a joint session of Congress, Clinton unveiled his economic plan. The plan focused on reducing the deficit rather than on cutting taxes for the middle class, which had been high on his campaign agenda. Clintons advisers pressured him to raise taxes, based on the theory that a smaller federal budget deficit would reduce bond interest rates. On May 19, 1993, Clinton fired seven employees of the White House Travel Office, causing the White House travel office controversy even though the travel office staff served at the pleasure of the president and could be dismissed without cause. The White House responded to the controversy by claiming that the firings were done in response to financial improprieties that had been revealed by a brief FBI investigation. Critics contended that the firings had been done to allow friends of the Clintons to take over the travel business and the involvement of the FBI was unwarranted. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore on the South Lawn, August 10, 1993. In August, Clinton signed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, which passed Congress without a Republican vote. It cut taxes for 15 million lowincome families, made tax cuts available to 90percent of small businesses, and raised taxes on the wealthiest 1.2percent of taxpayers. Additionally, it mandated that the budget be balanced over a number of years through the implementation of spending restraints. On September 22, 1993, Clinton made a major speech to Congress regarding a health care reform plan the program aimed at achieving universal coverage through a national health care plan. This was one of the most prominent items on Clintons legislative agenda and resulted from a task force headed by Hillary Clinton. The plan was well received in political circles, but it was eventually doomed by wellorganized lobby opposition from conservatives, the American Medical Association, and the health insurance industry. However, Clinton biographer John F. Harris stated that the program failed because of a lack of coordination within the White House. Despite the Democratic majority in Congress, the effort to create a national health care system ultimately died when compromise legislation by George J. Mitchell failed to gain a majority of support in August 1994. The failure of the bill was the first major legislative defeat of the Clinton administration. In November 1993, David Hale the source of criminal allegations against Bill Clinton in the Whitewater controversy alleged that while he was governor of Arkansas, Clinton pressured him to provide an illegal 300,000 loan to Susan McDougal, the Clintons partner in the Whitewater land deal. A U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission investigation resulted in convictions against the McDougals for their role in the Whitewater project, but the Clintons themselves were never charged, and Clinton maintains his and his wifes innocence in the affair. On November 30, 1993, Clinton signed into law the Brady Bill, which mandated federal background checks on people who purchase firearms in the United States. The law also imposed a fiveday waiting period on purchases, until the NICS system was implemented in 1998. He also expanded the Earned Income Tax Credit, a subsidy for lowincome workers. In December of the same year, allegations by Arkansas state troopers Larry Patterson and Roger Perry were first reported by David Brock in The American Spectator. In the affair later known as Troopergate, the officers alleged that they arranged sexual liaisons for Clinton back when he was governor of Arkansas. The story mentioned a woman named Paula , a reference to Paula Jones. Brock later apologized to Clinton, saying the article was politically motivated bad journalism, and that the troopers were greedy and had slimy motives. Clinton, Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat during the Oslo Accords on September 13, 1993 Clinton, Jordans King Hussein and Yitzhak Rabin sign the Israel Jordan peace treaty on July 25, 1994. That month, Clinton implemented a Department of Defense directive known as Dont Ask, Dont Tell, which allowed gay men and women to serve in the armed services provided they kept their sexual preferences a secret. The Act forbade the military from inquiring about an individuals sexual orientation. The policy was developed as a compromise after Clintons proposal to allow gays to serve openly in the military met staunch opposition from prominent Congressional Republicans and Democrats, including Senators John McCain and Sam Nunn . According to David Mixner, Clintons support for the compromise led to a heated dispute with Vice President Al Gore, who felt that the President should lift the ban... even though executive order was sure to be overridden by the Congress. Some gayrights advocates criticized Clinton for not going far enough and accused him of making his campaign promise to get votes and contributions. Their position was that Clinton should have integrated the military by executive order, noting that President Harry S. Truman used executive order to racially desegregate the armed forces. Clintons defenders argued that an executive order might have prompted the Senate to write the exclusion of gays into law, potentially making it harder to integrate the military in the future. Later in his presidency, in 1999, Clinton criticized the way the policy was implemented, saying he did not think any serious person could say it was not out of whack. The policy remained controversial, and was finally repealed in 2011, removing open sexual orientation as a reason for dismissal from the armed forces. On January 1, 1994, Clinton signed the North American Free Trade Agreement into law. Throughout his first year in office, Clinton consistently supported ratification of the treaty by the U.S. Senate. Clinton and most of his allies in the Democratic Leadership Committee strongly supported free trade measures there remained, however, strong disagreement within the party. Opposition came chiefly from antitrade Republicans, protectionist Democrats and supporters of Ross Perot. The bill passed the house with 234 votes against 200 opposed . The treaty was then ratified by the Senate and signed into law by the president. The Omnibus Crime Bill, which Clinton signed into law in September 1994, made many changes to U.S. crime and law enforcement legislation including the expansion of the death penalty to include crimes not resulting in death, such as running a largescale drug enterprise. During Clintons reelection campaign he said, My 1994 crime bill expanded the death penalty for drug kingpins, murderers of federal law enforcement officers, and nearly 60 additional categories of violent felons. It also included a subsection of assault weapons ban for a tenyear period. The Clinton administration also launched the first official White House website, whitehouse.gov, on October 21, 1994. It was followed by three more versions, resulting in the final edition launched in 2000. The White House website was part of a wider movement of the Clinton administration toward webbased communication. According to Robert Longley, Clinton and Gore were responsible for pressing almost all federal agencies, the U.S. court system and the U.S. military onto the Internet, thus opening up Americas government to more of Americas citizens than ever before. On July 17, 1996, Clinton issued Executive Order 13011 Federal Information Technology, ordering the heads of all federal agencies to utilize information technology fully to make the information of the agency easily accessible to the public. After two years of Democratic Party control, the Democrats lost control of Congress in the midterm elections in 1994, for the first time in forty years. Clintons coat of arms, granted by the Chief Herald of Ireland in 1995 Clinton and Russian President Boris Yeltsin in October 1995 The White House FBI files controversy of June 1996 arose concerning improper access by the White House to FBI securityclearance documents. Craig Livingstone, head of the White House Office of Personnel Security, improperly requested, and received from the FBI, background report files without asking permission of the subject individuals many of these were employees of former Republican administrations. In March 2000, Independent Counsel Robert Ray determined that there was no credible evidence of any crime. Rays report further stated, there was no substantial and credible evidence that any senior White House official was involved in seeking the files. On September 21, 1996, Clinton signed into law the Defense of Marriage Act , which defines marriage for federal purposes as the legal union of one man and one woman, allowing individual states to refuse to recognize gay marriages performed in other states. Paul Yandura, speaking for the White House gay and lesbian liaison office, said that Clintons signing of DOMA was a political decision that they made at the time of a reelection. In defense of his actions, Clinton has said that DOMA was an attempt to head off an attempt to send a constitutional amendment banning gay marriage to the states, a possibility he described as highly likely in the context of a very reactionary Congress. Administration spokesman Richard Socarides said, the alternatives we knew were going to be far worse, and it was time to move on and get the president reelected. Clinton himself stated that DOMA was something which the Republicans put on the ballot to try to get the base vote for Bush up, I think its obvious that something had to be done to try to keep the Republican Congress from presenting that. Others were more critical. The veteran gay rights and gay marriage activist Evan Wolfson has called these claims historic revisionism. In a July 2, 2011, editorial The New York Times opined, The Defense of Marriage Act was enacted in 1996 as an electionyear wedge issue, signed by President Bill Clinton in one of his worst policy moments. Ultimately, in United States v. Windsor, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down DOMA in June 2013. Despite DOMA, Clinton was the first president to select openly gay persons for administrative positions, and he is generally credited as being the first president to publicly champion gay rights. During his presidency, Clinton issued two substantially controversial executive orders on behalf of gay rights, the first lifting the ban on security clearances for LGBT federal employeesVolsky, Igor. Clinton Issued Order Letting Gays Get Security Clearances 16 Years Ago Today and the second outlawing discrimination based on sexual orientation in the federal civilian workforce. Under Clintons leadership, federal funding for HIVAIDS research, prevention and treatment more than doubled. Clinton also pushed for passing hate crimes laws for gays and for the private sector Employment NonDiscrimination Act, which, buoyed by his lobbying, failed to pass the Senate by a single vote in 1996. Advocacy for these issues, paired with the politically unpopular nature of the gay rights movement at the time, led to enthusiastic support for Clintons election and reelection by the Human Rights Campaign. Clinton came out for gay marriage in July 2009 and urged the Supreme Court to overturn DOMA in 2013. He was later honored by GLAAD for his prior progay stances and his reversal on DOMA. The 1996 United States campaign finance controversy was an alleged effort by the Peoples Republic of China to influence the domestic policies of the United States, before and during the Clinton administration, and involved the fundraising practices of the administration itself. The Chinese government denied all accusations. As part of a 1996 initiative to curb illegal immigration, Clinton signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act on September 30, 1996. Appointed by Clinton, the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform recommended reducing legal immigration from about 800,000 people a year to about 550,000. Ken Gormley, author of The Death of American Virtue Clinton vs. Starr , reveals in his book that Clinton narrowly escaped possible assassination in the Philippines in November 1996. During his visit to the AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation forum in Manila, while he was on his way to meet with a senior member of the Philippine government, Clinton was saved from danger minutes before his motorcade was scheduled to drive over a bridge charged with a timed improvised explosive device . According to officials, the IED was large enough to blow up the entire presidential motorcade. Details of the plot were revealed to Gormley by Lewis C. Merletti, former member of the presidential protection detail and Director of the Secret Service. Intelligence officers intercepted a radio transmission indicating that there was a wedding cake under a bridge. This alerted Merletti and others as Clintons motorcade was scheduled to drive over a major bridge in downtown Manila. Once more, the word wedding was the code name used by a terrorist group for a past assassination attempt. Merletti wanted to reroute the motorcade, but the alternate route would add fortyfive minutes to the drive time. Clinton was very angry, as he was already late for the meeting, but following the advice of the secret service possibly saved his life. Two other bombs had been discovered in Manila earlier in the week so the threat level that day was high. Security personnel at the Manila International Airport uncovered several grenades and a timing device in a travel bag. Officials also discovered a bomb near a major U.S. naval base. The president was scheduled to visit both of these locations later in the week. An intense investigation took place into the events in Manila and it was discovered that the group behind the bridge bomb was a Saudi terrorist group in Afghanistan known as alQaeda and the plot was masterminded by Osama bin Laden. Until recently, this thwarted assassination attempt was never made public and remained top secret. Only top members of the U.S. intelligence community were aware of these events. 1996 presidential election 1996 electoral vote results. President Bill Clinton , first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and their daughter Chelsea wave to watchers at a parade down Pennsylvania Avenue on Inauguration Day, January 20, 1997. In the 1996 presidential election, Clinton was reelected, receiving 49.2percent of the popular vote over Republican Bob Dole and Reform candidate Ross Perot , becoming the first Democratic incumbent since Lyndon B. Johnson to be elected to a second term and the first Democrat since Franklin D. Roosevelt to be elected president more than once. The Republicans lost three seats in the House and gained two in the Senate, but retained control of both houses of the 105th United States Congress. Clinton received 379, or over 70percent of the Electoral College votes, with Dole receiving 159 electoral votes. Second term Al Gore and Newt Gingrich applaud as Clinton waves during the State of the Union address in 1997. In the January 1997 State of the Union address, Clinton proposed a new initiative to provide health coverage to up to five million children. Senators Ted Kennedy a Democrat and Orrin Hatch a Republican teamed up with Hillary Rodham Clinton and her staff in 1997, and succeeded in passing legislation forming the State Childrens Health Insurance Program , the largest health care reform in the years of the Clinton Presidency. That year, Hillary Clinton shepherded through Congress the Adoption and Safe Families Act and two years later she succeeded in helping pass the Foster Care Independence Act. He negotiated the passage of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 by the Republican Congress. In October 1997, he announced he was getting hearing aids, due to hearing loss attributed to his age, and his time spent as a musician in his youth. In 1999 Clinton signed into law the Financial Services Modernization Act also known as the Gramm Leach Bliley Act, which repealed the part of the Glass Steagall Act that had prohibited a bank from offering a full range of investment, commercial banking, and insurance services since its enactment in 1933. Impeachment and acquittal Clintons impeachment trial in 1999 After the 1998 elections, the House impeached Clinton, alleging perjury and obstruction of justice related to the Lewinsky scandal. Clinton was only the second U.S. president to be impeached, after Andrew Johnson. Impeachment proceedings were based on allegations that Clinton had illegally lied about and covered up his relationship with 22yearold White House employee Monica Lewinsky. After the Starr Report was submitted to the House providing what it termed substantial and credible information that President Clinton Committed Acts that May Constitute Grounds for an Impeachment, the House began impeachment hearings against Clinton before the midterm elections. To hold impeachment proceedings, the Republican leadership called a lameduck session in December 1998. Clinton shaking hands with future president Donald Trump at Trump Tower, June 2000 While the House Judiciary Committee hearings ended in a straight partyline vote, there was lively debate on the House floor. The two charges passed in the House were for perjury and obstruction of justice. The perjury charge arose from Clintons testimony before a grand jury that had been convened to investigate perjury he may have committed in his sworn deposition during Jones v. Clinton, Paula Joness sexual harassment lawsuit. The obstruction charge was based on his actions to conceal his relationship with Lewinsky before and after that deposition. The Senate later acquitted Clinton on both charges. The Senate refused to meet to hold an impeachment trial before the end of the old term, so the trial was held over until the next Congress. Clinton was represented by Washington law firm Williams Connolly. The Senate finished a twentyoneday trial on February 12, 1999, with the vote of 55 Not Guilty45 Guilty on the perjury charge and 50 Not Guilty50 Guilty on the obstruction of justice charge. Both votes fell short of the Constitutional twothirds majority requirement to convict and remove an officeholder. The final vote was generally along party lines, with no Democrats voting guilty, and only a handful of Republicans voting not guilty. On January 19, 2001, Clintons law license was suspended for five years after he acknowledged to an Arkansas circuit court that he had engaged in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice in the Jones case. Pardons and commutations Clinton controversially issued 141 pardons and 36 commutations on his last day in office on January 20, 2001. Most of the controversy surrounded Marc Rich and allegations that Hillary Clintons brother, Hugh Rodham, accepted payments in return for influencing the presidents decisionmaking regarding the pardons. Federal prosecutor Mary Jo White was appointed to investigate the pardon of Rich. She was later replaced by thenRepublican James Comey, who found no wrongdoing on Clintons part. Some of Clintons pardons remain a point of controversy. Military and foreign events Clinton and UK Prime Minister Tony Blair in Florence, Italy on November 20, 1999. Clinton speaks with Col. Paul Fletcher, USAF, before boarding Air Force One, November 4, 1999. Many military events occurred during Clintons presidency. The Battle of Mogadishu occurred in Somalia in 1993. During the operation, two U.S. helicopters were shot down by rocketpropelled grenade attacks to their tail rotors, trapping soldiers behind enemy lines. This resulted in an urban battle that killed 18 American soldiers, wounded 73 others, and one was taken prisoner. There were many more Somali casualties. Some of the American bodies were dragged through the streets a spectacle broadcast on television news programs. In response, U.S. forces were withdrawn from Somalia and later conflicts were approached with fewer soldiers on the ground. In 1995, U.S. and NATO aircraft attacked Bosnian Serb targets to halt attacks on U.N. safe zones and to pressure them into a peace accord. Clinton deployed U.S. peacekeepers to Bosnia in late 1995, to uphold the subsequent Dayton Agreement. General John P. Jumper, U.S. Air Forces in Europe commander, escorts Clinton upon his arrival to Ramstein Air Base, Germany, May 5, 1999. The president visited several European air bases to thank the troops for their support of NATO Operations Allied Force and Shining Hope. In February 1996, the Clinton administration agreed to pay Iran US131.8 million in settlement to discontinue a case brought by Iran in 1989 against the U.S. in the International Court of Justice after the shooting down of Iran Air Flight 655 by the U.S. Navy guided missile cruiser. Capturing Osama bin Laden had been an objective of the U.S. government during the presidency of Bill Clinton . Despite claims by Mansoor Ijaz and Sudanese officials that the Sudanese government had offered to arrest and extradite bin Laden and that U.S. authorities rejected each offer the 911 Commission Report stated that we have not found any reliable evidence to support the Sudanese claim. In response to a 1996 State Department warning about bin Laden and the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in East Africa by alQaeda , Clinton ordered several military missions to capture or kill bin Laden, both of which were unsuccessful. In August 1998, Clinton ordered cruise missile strikes on terrorist targets in Afghanistan and Sudan, targeting the AlShifa pharmaceutical factory in Sudan, which was suspected of assisting bin Laden in making chemical weapons, and bin Ladens terrorist training camps in Afghanistan. Clinton greets Air Force personnel at Spangdahlem Air Base, May 5, 1999. To stop the ethnic cleansing and genocide of Albanians by antiguerilla military units in the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavias province of Kosovo, Clinton authorized the use of U.S. Armed Forces in a NATO bombing campaign against Yugoslavia in 1999, named Operation Allied Force. General Wesley Clark was Supreme Allied Commander of NATO and oversaw the mission. With United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, the bombing campaign ended on June 10, 1999. The resolution placed Kosovo under UN administration and authorized a peacekeeping force to be deployed to the region. NATO announced that its forces had suffered zero combat deaths, and two deaths from an Apache helicopter crash. Opinions in the popular press criticized prewar genocide statements by the Clinton administration as greatly exaggerated. In 2001, the U.N.supervised Supreme Court of Kosovo ruled that genocide did not take place, but recognized a systematic campaign of terror, including murders, rapes, arsons and severe maltreatments. The term ethnic cleansing was used as an alternative to genocide to denote not just ethnically motivated murder but also displacement, though critics charge there is no difference. Slobodan Miloaevi, the president of Yugoslavia at the time of the atrocities, was eventually brought to trial before the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in the Hague on charges of crimes against humanity, genocide, and war crimes. Miloaevi died in 2006, before the completion of the trial.Milosevics war crimes trial a 4year marathon, CNN . In Clintons 1998 State of the Union Address, he warned Congress that Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein was building an arsenal of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons President Clinton, Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat at Camp David, July 2000 Seeking to weaken Husseins grip on power, Clinton signed the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998 into law on October 31, 1998, which instituted a policy of regime change against Iraq, though it explicitly stated it did not provide for direct intervention on the part of American military forces. The administration then launched a fourday bombing campaign named Operation Desert Fox, lasting from December 16 to 19, 1998. At the end of this operation Clinton announced that So long as Saddam remains in power, he will remain a threat to his people, his region, and the world. With our allies, we must pursue a strategy to contain him and to constrain his weapons of mass destruction program, while working toward the day Iraq has a government willing to live at peace with its people and with its neighbors. American and British aircraft in the Iraq nofly zones attacked hostile Iraqi air defenses 166 times in 1999 and 78 times in 2000. Clintons November 2000 visit to Vietnam was the first by a U.S. president since the end of the Vietnam War. On October 10, 2000, Clinton signed into law the U.S. China Relations Act of 2000, which granted permanent normal trade relations trade status to Peoples Republic of China. The president asserted that free trade would gradually open China to democratic reform. Clinton also oversaw a boom of the U.S. economy. Under Clinton, the United States had a projected federal budget surplus for the first time since 1969. After initial successes such as the Oslo Accords of the early 1990s, which also led to the Israel Jordan peace treaty in 1994 and the Wye River Memorandum in October 1998, Clinton attempted an effort to end the Israeli Palestinian conflict. He brought Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian Authority chairman Yasser Arafat together at Camp David for the Camp David Summit in July 2000, which lasted 14 days. Following the failures of the peace talks, Clinton stated Arafat missed the opportunity to facilitate a just and lasting peace. In his autobiography, Clinton blames Arafat for the collapse of the summit. Following another attempt in December 2000 at Bolling Air Force Base, in which the president offered the Clinton Parameters, the situation broke down completely after the end of the Taba Summit and with the start of the Second Intifada. Judicial appointments Ruth Bader Ginsburg accepting her nomination to the Supreme Court from President Clinton. Clinton appointed two justices to the Supreme Court Ruth Bader Ginsburg in 1993 and Stephen Breyer in 1994. Along with his two Supreme Court appointments, Clinton appointed 66 judges to the United States courts of appeals and 305 judges to the United States district courts. His 373 judicial appointments are the second most in American history behind those of Ronald Reagan. Clinton also experienced a number of judicial appointment controversies, as 69 nominees to federal judgeships did not receive a vote in the Republicancontrolled Senate Judiciary Committee. In all, 84percent of his nominees were confirmed. Sonia Sotomayor was one of the judges who Clinton appointed to the Court of Appeals. She was nominated by Clinton in 1997 to the Second Circuit. Sotomayor was confirmed in 1998, following a delay of more than a year that was caused by Republican opposition.Meg Greene, Sonia Sotomayor A Biography , pp. 121 29.Sonia Sotomayor Fast Facts, CNN Library . Clinton was the first president in history to appoint more women and minority judges than white male judges to the federal courts.Nancy Scherer, Scoring Points Politicians, Activists, and the Lower Federal Court Appointment Process , p. 85. In his eight years in office, 11.6 of Clintons court of appeals nominees and 17.4 of his district court nominees were black 32.8 of his court of appeals nominees and 28.5 of his district court nominees were women.Scherer, p. 85. Clinton appointed the first African American judges to the Fourth Circuit and the Seventh Circuit . Clinton also appointed the nations first openly gay or lesbian federal judge when he named Deborah Batts to the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. Batts was confirmed by the Senate in a voice vote in 1994.Henry J. Reske, Appointment Breaks Barrier First Openly Gay Federal Judge Assumes Duties, ABA Journal , p. 27. Public opinion Clintons approval ratings throughout his presidential career Throughout Clintons first term, his job approval rating fluctuated in the 40s and 50s. In his second term, his rating consistently ranged from the high50s to the high60s. After his impeachment proceedings in 1998 and 1999, Clintons rating reached its highest point. According to a CBS News New York Times poll, Clinton left office with an approval rating of 68percent, which matched those of Ronald Reagan and Franklin D. Roosevelt as the highest ratings for departing presidents in the modern era. Clintons average Gallup poll approval rating for his last quarter in office was 61, the highest final quarter rating any president has received for fifty years.David W. Moore, Clinton Leaves Office With Mixed Public Reaction, Gallup Organization . Fortyseven percent of the respondents identified themselves as being Clinton supporters. As he was leaving office, a CNN USA Today Gallup poll revealed that 45percent of Americans said they would miss him 55percent thought he would have something worthwhile to contribute and should remain active in public life 68percent thought he would be remembered more for his involvement in personal scandal than for his accomplishments and 58percent answered No to the question Do you generally think Bill Clinton is honest and trustworthy The same percentage said he would be remembered as either outstanding or above average as a president, while 22percent said he would be remembered as below average or poor. ABC News characterized public consensus on Clinton as, You cant trust him, hes got weak morals and ethics and hes done a heck of a good job. In May 2006, a CNN poll comparing Clintons job performance with that of his successor, George W. Bush, found that a strong majority of respondents said Clinton outperformed Bush in six different areas questioned. Gallup polls in 2007 and 2011 showed that Clinton was regarded by 13 percent of Americans as the greatest president in U.S. history.Lydia Saad, Lincoln Resumes Position as Americans TopRated President Reagan and Clinton lead among members of their respective parties, Gallup .Frank Newport, Say Reagan Is the Greatest U.S. President Lincoln and Clinton next on the list Washington fifth, Gallup . In 2014, 18 percent of respondents in a Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll of American voters regarded Clinton as the best president since World War II, making him the third most popular among postwar presidents, behind John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan.Obama Is First As Worst President Since WWII, Quinnipiac University National Poll Finds More Voters Say Romney Would Have Been Better, Quinnipiac University . The same poll showed that just 3 of American voters regarded Clinton as the worst president since World War II. A 2015 poll by The Washington Post asked 162 scholars of the American Political Science Association to rank all the U.S. presidents in order of greatness. According to their findings, Clinton ranked eighth overall, with a rating of 70 percent.New ranking of U.S. presidents puts Lincoln at No. 1, Obama at 18 Kennedy judged most overrated The Washington Post.. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Public image Clinton addressing the British parliament on November 29, 1995. As the first baby boomer president, Clinton was the first chief executive since Calvin Coolidge who was not alive during World War II. Authors Martin Walker and Bob Woodward stated that Clintons innovative use of sound biteready dialogue, personal charisma, and public perceptionoriented campaigning were a major factor in his high public approval ratings.Martin Walker, Clinton the President they deserve , Fourth Estate 1999Bob Woodward, The choice how Clinton won , Touchstone 1996, When Clinton played the saxophone on The Arsenio Hall Show , he was described by some religious conservatives as the MTV president. Opponents sometimes referred to him as Slick Willie, a nickname which was first applied to him in 1980 by Pine Bluff Commercial journalist Paul GreenbergAmerican FrontlineStories of Bill. Retrieved May 4, 2015 Greenberg believed that Clinton was abandoning the progressive policies of previous Arkansas Governors such as Winthrop Rockefeller, Dale Bumpers and David Pryor. The claim Slick Willie would last throughout his presidency. Standing at a height of , Clinton is tied with five others as the fourthtallest president in the nations history. His folksy manner led him to be nicknamed Bubba, especially in the South. Since 2000, he has frequently been referred to as The Big Dog or Big Dog. His prominent role in campaigning for President Obama during the 2012 presidential election and his widely publicized speech at the 2012 Democratic National Convention, where he officially nominated Obama and criticized Republican nominee Mitt Romney and Republican policies in detail, earned him the nickname ExplainerinChief. Clinton drew strong support from the African American community and insisted that the improvement of race relations would be a major theme of his presidency. In 1998, Nobel laureate Toni Morrison called Clinton the first Black president, saying, Clinton displays almost every trope of blackness singleparent household, born poor, workingclass, saxophoneplaying, McDonaldsandjunkfoodloving boy from Arkansas. Morrison noted that Clintons sex life was scrutinized more than his career accomplishments, and she compared this to the stereotyping and double standards that blacks typically endure. Many viewed this comparison as unfair and disparaging to both Clinton and the AfricanAmerican community at large. Clinton, a Baptist,Sullivan, The Party Faithful , p. 101. has been open about his faith.Sullivan, The Party Faithful , p. 9. Shortly after Clinton took office, Richard Mellon Scaife, a conservative newspaper owner, organized a fundraising campaign to smear Clintons image in the media. Leading the Arkansas Project, Scaife and other associates sought to find sources in Clintons home state of Arkansas who would be willing to dish out negative allegations against the president. Clinton at a Democratic Get out the vote rally in Los Angeles, California, on November 2, 2000 In 1994, Paula Jones initiated a sexual harassment lawsuit against Clinton, claiming that he made unwanted advances towards her in 1991 Clinton denied the allegations. In April 1998, the case was initially dismissed by Judge Susan Webber Wright on the grounds that it lacked legal merit. Jones appealed Webber Wrights ruling, and her suit gained traction following Clintons admission to having an affair with Monica Lewinsky in August 1998. In 1998, lawyers for Paula Jones released court documents that alleged a pattern of sexual harassment by Clinton when he was Governor of Arkansas. Robert S. Bennett, Clintons main lawyer for the case, called the filing a pack of lies and an organized campaign to smear the President of the United States funded by Clintons political enemies. Clinton later agreed to an outofcourt settlement and paid Jones 850,000. Bennett said that the president made the settlement only so he could end the lawsuit for good and move on with his life. During the deposition for the Jones lawsuit, which was held at the White House, Clinton denied having sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky a denial that became the basis for an impeachment charge of perjury. In 1992, Gennifer Flowers stated that she had a relationship with Clinton that began in 1980. Flowers at first denied that she had an affair with Clinton, but later changed her story. After Clinton at first denied having a relationship with Flowers on 60 Minutes , he later admitted that he had a sexual encounter with Flowers. Clinton speaking at the 2016 Democratic National Convention. In 1998, Kathleen Willey alleged that Clinton groped her in a hallway in 1993. An independent counsel determined Willey gave false information to the FBI, inconsistent with sworn testimony related to the Jones allegation. On March 19, 1998, Julie Hiatt Steele, a friend of Willey, released an affidavit, accusing the former White House aide of asking her to lie to corroborate Ms. Willeys account of being sexually groped by Clinton in the Oval Office. An attempt by Kenneth Starr to prosecute Steele for making false statements and obstructing justice ended in a mistrial and Starr declined to seek a retrial after Steele sought an investigation against the former Independent Counsel for prosecutorial misconduct. Linda Tripps grand jury testimony also differed from Willeys claims regarding inappropriate sexual advances. Also in 1998, Juanita Broaddrick alleged that Clinton had raped her in the spring of 1978, although she stated she did not remember the exact date. In another 1998 event, Elizabeth Gracen recanted a sixyearold denial and stated she had a onenight stand with Clinton in 1982. Gracen later apologized to Hillary Clinton. Throughout the year, however, Gracen eluded a subpoena from Kenneth Starr to testify her claim in court. Postpresidency Clinton greets a Hurricane Katrina evacuee, September 5, 2005. In the background, second from the right, is thenSenator Barack Obama. Bill Clinton continues to be active in public life, giving speeches, fundraising, and founding charitable organizations. Clinton has spoken in prime time at every Democratic National Convention since 1988.Bill Clintons Democratic Convention Speeches, The New York Times . Robert Reich has suggested that Clinton is in a state of permanent election, due to the impeachment proceedings during his presidency and his continuing support in the campaigns of his wife Hillary Clinton.The Permanent Election. The American Prospect . Retrieved February 3, 2016. Activities until 2008 campaign In 2002, Clinton warned that preemptive military action against Iraq would have unwelcome consequences, and later claimed to have opposed the Iraq War from the start . In 2005, Clinton criticized the Bush administration for its handling of emissions control, while speaking at the United Nations Climate Change conference in Montreal. The William J. Clinton Presidential Center and Park in Little Rock, Arkansas was dedicated in 2004. Clinton released a bestselling autobiography, My Life in 2004. In 2007, he released Giving How Each of Us Can Change the World , which also became a New York Times Best Seller and garnered positive reviews. Former president George H. W. Bush and Clinton in the White House Library, January 2005 In the aftermath of the 2004 Asian tsunami, U.N. SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan appointed Clinton to head a relief effort. After Hurricane Katrina, Clinton joined with fellow former president George H. W. Bush to establish the BushClinton Tsunami Fund in January 2005, and the BushClinton Katrina Fund in October of that year. As part of the tsunami effort, these two expresidents appeared in a Super Bowl XXXIX pregame show, and traveled to the affected areas. They also spoke together at the funeral of Boris Yeltsin in April 2007. The dedication of the Clinton Presidential Center, 2004 Based on his philanthropic worldview, Clinton created the William J. Clinton Foundation to address issues of global importance. This foundation includes the Clinton Foundation HIV and AIDS Initiative , which strives to combat that disease, and has worked with the Australian government toward that end. The Clinton Global Initiative , begun by the Clinton Foundation in 2005, attempts to address world problems such as global public health, poverty alleviation and religious and ethnic conflict. In 2005, Clinton announced through his foundation an agreement with manufacturers to stop selling sugared drinks in schools. Clintons foundation joined with the Large Cities Climate Leadership Group in 2006 to improve cooperation among those cities, and he met with foreign leaders to promote this initiative. The foundation has received donations from a number of governments all over the world, including Asia and the Middle East. In 2008, Foundation director Inder Singh announced deals to reduce the price of antimalaria drugs by 30percent in developing nations. Clinton also spoke in favor of California Proposition 87 on alternative energy, which was voted down. 2008 presidential election Clinton speaking at the 2008 Democratic National Convention During the 2008 Democratic presidential primary campaign, Clinton vigorously advocated on behalf of his wife, Hillary Clinton. Through speaking engagements and fundraisers, he was able to raise 10million toward her campaign. Some worried that as an expresident, he was too active on the trail, too negative to Clinton rival Barack Obama, and alienating his supporters at home and abroad. Many were especially critical of him following his remarks in the South Carolina primary, which Obama won. Later in the 2008 primaries, there was some infighting between Bill and Hillarys staffs, especially in Pennsylvania. Considering Bills remarks, many thought that he could not rally Hillary supporters behind Obama after Obama won the primary. Such remarks lead to apprehension that the party would be split to the detriment of Obamas election. Fears were allayed August 27, 2008, when Clinton enthusiastically endorsed Obama at the 2008 Democratic National Convention, saying that all his experience as president assures him that Obama is ready to lead. After Hillary Clintons presidential campaign was over, Bill Clinton continued to raise funds to help pay off her campaign debt. After the 2008 election Clinton with incumbent President Barack Obama and Senior Advisor Valerie Jarrett in July 2010 In 2009, Clinton travelled to North Korea on behalf of two American journalists imprisoned there. Euna Lee and Laura Ling had been imprisoned for illegally entering the country from China. Jimmy Carter had made a similar visit in 1994. After Clinton met with North Korean leader Kim Jongil, Kim issued a pardon. Since then, Clinton has been assigned a number of other diplomatic missions. He was named United Nations Special Envoy to Haiti in 2009. In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, U.S. President Barack Obama announced that Clinton and George W. Bush would coordinate efforts to raise funds for Haitis recovery. Clinton continues to visit Haiti to witness the inauguration of refugee villages, and to raise funds for victims of the earthquake. In 2010, Clinton announced support of, and delivered the keynote address for, the inauguration of NTR, Irelands first environmental foundation. At the 2012 Democratic National Convention, Clinton gave a widely praised speech nominating Barack Obama. 2016 presidential election Clinton campaigning at an election rally for his wife who was running to become the President of the United States, 2016 During the 2016 Presidential Election, Clinton again encouraged voters to support Hillary Clinton, including a campaign stop in Wilmington, NC. In a series of tweets, thenPresidentElect Donald Trump criticized his ability to get people out to vote. After the 2016 election On September 7, 2017, Clinton partnered with former Presidents Jimmy Carter, George H. W. Bush, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities. Postpresidential health concerns In September 2004, Clinton underwent quadruple bypass surgery. In March 2005, he again underwent surgery, this time for a partially collapsed lung. On February 11, 2010, he was rushed to NewYork Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan after complaining of chest pains, and he had two coronary stents implanted in his heart. After this procedure, Clinton adopted the plantbased whole foods diet, which had been recommended by doctors Dean Ornish and Caldwell Esselstyn. Wealth Bill Clinton speaks at Central High School in Phoenix, Arizona, 2016. The Clintons accrued several million dollars in legal fees during his presidency the bills were paid off four years after he left office. Bill and Hillary Clinton have both received millions of dollars in book authorship fees. In 2016, Forbes reported Bill and Hillary Clinton made about 240 million in the 15 years from January 2001 to December 2015 .How Bill And Hillary Clinton Made 240 Million In The Last 15 Years , Forbes Also in 2016, CNN reported the Clintons combined to receive more than 153 million in paid speeches from 2001 until spring 2015. In May 2015, The Hill reported that Bill and Hillary Clinton have made more than 25 million in speaking fees since the start of 2014, and that Hillary Clinton also made 5 million or more from her book, Hard Choices , during the same time period.Ben Kamisar, Clintons earned more than 25 million for speeches since 2014 , The Hill In July 2014, The Wall Street Journal reported that at the end of 2012, the Clintons were worth between 5 million and 25.5 million, and that in 2012 the Clintons made between 16 and 17 million, mostly from speaking fees earned by the former president.The Bill and Hillary Clinton Money Machine Taps Corporate Cash, BRODY MULLINS, PETER NICHOLAS and REBECCA BALLHAUS, The Wall Street Journal , July 1, 2014 Clinton earned more than 104 million from paid speeches between 2001 and 2012. In June 2014, ABC News and The Washington Post reported that Bill Clinton has made more than 100 million giving paid speeches since leaving public office, and in 2008, the New York Times reported that the Clintons income tax returns show they have made 109 million in the 8 years from January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2007, including almost 92 million from his speaking and bookwriting.How the Clintons went from dead broke to rich Bill earned 104.9 million for speeches , The Washington Post Hillary Clinton Defends HighDollar Speaking Fees , ABC News and Good Morning America Bills 500,000 Kuwait Lecture , The Daily Beast Bill Clinton has given dozens of paid speeches each year since leaving office in 2001, mostly to corporations and philanthropic groups in North America and Europe he often earned 100,000 to 300,000 per speech.Josh Gerstein, Clinton Eligible, Once Again, To Practice Law , New York Sun, January 17, 2006, downloaded from N.Y. Sun article. Hillary Clinton said that she and Bill came out of the White House financially broke and in debt, especially due to large legal fees incurred during their years in the White House. We had no money when we got there, and we struggled to, you know, piece together the resources for mortgages, for houses, for Chelseas education. She added, Bill has worked really hard... we had to pay off all our debts... he had to make double the money because of, obviously, taxes and then pay off the debts, and get us houses, and take care of family members. Honors and recognition Secretary of Defense Cohen presents President Clinton the DoD Medal for Distinguished Public Service. Bill Clinton statue in Pristina, the capital of Kosovo Various colleges and universities have awarded Clinton honorary degrees, including Doctorate of Law degrees and Doctor of Humane Letters degrees. He is an Honorary Fellow of University College, Oxford, which he attended as a Rhodes Scholar, although he did not complete his studies there. Schools have been named for Clinton, and statues have been built to pay him homage. U.S. states where he has been honored include Missouri, Arkansas, Kentucky, and New York. He was presented with the Medal for Distinguished Public Service by Secretary of Defense William Cohen in 2001. The Clinton Presidential Center was opened in Little Rock, Arkansas in his honor on December 5, 2001. He has been honored in various other ways, in countries that include the Czech Republic, Papua New Guinea, Germany, and Kosovo. The Republic of Kosovo, in gratitude for his help during the Kosovo War, renamed a major street in the capital city of Pristina as Bill Clinton Boulevard and added a monumental Clinton statue. Clinton was selected as Time Man of the Year in 1992, and again in 1998, along with Ken Starr. From a poll conducted of the American people in December 1999, Clinton was among eighteen included in Gallups List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century. He was honored with a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children, a J. William Fulbright Prize for International Understanding, a TED Prize , and was named as an Honorary GLAAD Media Award recipient for his work as an advocate for the LGBT community. In 2011, President Michel Martelly of Haiti awarded Clinton with the National Order of Honour and Merit to the rank of Grand Cross for his various initiatives in Haiti and especially his high contribution to the reconstruction of the country after the earthquake of January 12, 2010. Clinton declared at the ceremony that in the United States of America, I really dont believe former American presidents need awards anymore, but I am very honored by this one, I love Haiti, and I believe in its promise. U.S. President Barack Obama awarded Clinton the Presidential Medal of Freedom on November 20, 2013. Electoral history Year Office District Democratic Republican Other 1974 Arkansas 3rd congressional district Arkansas Bill Clinton 48.17 John Paul Hammerschmidt 51.83 1976 Arkansas Attorney General Arkansas Bill Clinton Unopposed 1978 Governor of Arkansas Arkansas Bill Clinton 63 Lynn Lowe 37 1980 Governor of Arkansas Arkansas Bill Clinton 48 Frank White 52 1982 Governor of Arkansas Arkansas Bill Clinton 55 Frank White 45 1984 Governor of Arkansas Arkansas Bill Clinton 63 Woody Freeman 37 1986 Governor of Arkansas Arkansas Bill Clinton 64 Frank White 36 1990 Governor of Arkansas Arkansas Bill Clinton 57 Sheffield Nelson 42 1992 President of the United States United States of America Bill Clinton 43 George H. W. Bush 37 Ross Perot 19 1996 President of the United States United States of America Bill Clinton 49 Bob Dole 41 Ross Perot 8 Authored books Recordings Bill Clinton is one of the narrators on a 2003 recording of Sergei Prokofievs Peter and the Wolf , on Pentatone, together with Mikhail Gorbachev and Sophia Loren. See also Clinton family Clinton School of Public Service Gun control policy of the Clinton Administration Historical rankings of Presidents of the United States List of Governors of Arkansas List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience References Further reading Primary sources Clinton, Bill. . Science in the National Interest. Washington, D.C. The White House, August 1994. . The Climate Change Action Plan. Washington, D.C. The White House, October 1993. Taylor Branch The Clinton Tapes Wrestling History with the President. Simon Schuster. Official Congressional Record Impeachment Set... Containing the Procedures for Implementing the Articles of Impeachment and the Proceedings of the Impeachment Trial of President William Jefferson Clinton. Washington, D.C. U.S. G.P.O., 1999. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, William J. Clinton. Washington, D.C. Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration For sale by the Supt. of Docs., U.S. G.P.O., 1994 2002. S. Daniel Abraham Peace Is Possible , foreword by Bill Clinton Popular books Peter Baker The Breach Inside the Impeachment and Trial of William Jefferson Clinton James Bovard Feeling Your Pain The Explosion and Abuse of Government Power in the ClintonGore Years Joe Conason and Gene Lyons The Hunting of the President The TenYear Campaign to Destroy Bill and Hillary Clinton Elizabeth Drew On the Edge The Clinton Presidency David Gergen Eyewitness to Power The Essence of Leadership. Nigel Hamilton Bill Clinton An American Journey Christopher Hitchens No One Left to Lie to The Triangulations of William Jefferson Clinton Michael Isikoff Uncovering Clinton A Reporters Story Mark Katz Clinton and Me A RealLife Political Comedy David Maraniss The Clinton Enigma A Four and a Half Minute Speech Reveals This Presidents Entire Life Dick Morris with Eileen McGann Because He Could Richard A. Posner An Affair of State The Investigation, Impeachment, and Trial of President Clinton Mark J. Rozell The Clinton Scandal and the Future of American Government Timperlake, Edward, and William C. Triplett II Year of the Rat How Bill Clinton Compromised U.S. Security for Chinese Cash . Washington, D.C. Regnery Publishing, 1998. Michael Waldman POTUS Speaks Finding the Words That Defined the Clinton Presidency Ivory Tower Publishing Company. Achievements of the Clinton Administration the Complete Legislative and Executive. Scholarly studies Campbell, Colin, and Bert A. Rockman, eds. The Clinton Legacy Cohen Jeffrey E. The Polls Change and Stability in Public Assessments of Personal Traits, Bill Clinton, 1993 99 Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 31, 2001 Cronin, Thomas E. and Michael A. Genovese President Clinton and Character Questions Presidential Studies Quarterly Vol. 28, 1998 Davis John. The Evolution of American Grand Strategy and the War on Terrorism Clinton and Bush Perspectives White House Studies , Vol. 3, 2003 Dumbrell, John. Was there a Clinton doctrine President Clintons foreign policy reconsidered. Diplomacy and Statecraft 13.2 43 56. Edwards George C. Bill Clinton and His Crisis of Governance Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 28, 1998 Fisher Patrick. Clintons Greatest Legislative Achievement the Success of the 1993 Budget Reconciliation Bill White House Studies , Vol. 1, 2001 Glad Betty. Evaluating Presidential Character Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 28, 1998 Harris, John F. The Survivor Bill Clinton in the White House . Head, Simon. The Clinton System , The New York Review of Books Hyland, William G. . Clintons World Remaking American Foreign Policy Jewett, Aubrey W. and Marc D. Turetzky Stability and Change in President Clintons Foreign Policy Beliefs, 1993 96 Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 28, 1998 Kim, Claire Jean. Managing the Racial Breach Clinton, Black White Polarization, and the Race Initiative. Political Science Quarterly 117.1 55 79. online Laham, Nicholas, A Lost Cause Bill Clintons Campaign for National Health Insurance Lanoue, David J. and Craig F. Emmert Voting in the Glare of the Spotlight Representatives Votes on the Impeachment of President Clinton Polity , Vol. 32, 1999 Levy, Peter B. Encyclopedia of the Clinton presidency Maurer Paul J. Media Feeding Frenzies Press Behavior during Two Clinton Scandals Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 29, 1999 Nie Martin A. Its the Environment, Stupid Clinton and the Environment Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 27, 1997 in JSTOR OConnor Brendon. Policies, Principles, and Polls Bill Clintons Third Way Welfare Politics 1992 1996 The Australian Journal of Politics and History , Vol. 48, 2002 Poveda Tony G. Clinton, Crime, and the Justice Department Social Justice , Vol. 21, 1994 Renshon Stanley A. The Clinton Presidency Campaigning, Governing, and the Psychology of Leadership Westview Press, 1995 Romano, Flavio. Clinton and Blair the political economy of the third way Renshon Stanley A. The Polls The Publics Response to the Clinton Scandals, Part 1 Inconsistent Theories, Contradictory Evidence Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 32, 2002 Rushefsky, Mark E. and Kant Patel. Politics, Power Policy Making The Case of Health Care Reform in the 1990s Schantz, Harvey L. Politics in an Era of Divided Government Elections and Governance in the Second Clinton Administration Troy, Gill. The Age of Clinton America in the 1990s Warshaw, Shirley Anne. The Clinton Years Wattenberg Martin P. The Democrats Decline in the House during the Clinton Presidency An Analysis of Partisan Swings Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 29, 1999 Wattier Mark J. The Clinton Factor The Effects of Clintons Personal Image in 2000 Presidential Primaries and in the General Election White House Studies , Vol. 4, 2004 External links Official Presidential Library Museum White House biography Organizations Clinton Foundation Interviews, speeches, and statements Full audio of a number of Clinton speeches Miller Center of Public Affairs Oral History Interview with Bill Clinton from Oral Histories of the American South, June 1974 The Wanderer, a profile from The New Yorker , September 2006 Media coverage Other Extensive essays on Bill Clinton and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Life Portrait of Bill Clinton, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , December 20, 1999 Clinton an American Experience documentary Category1946 births Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury American writers Category20thcentury Baptists Category21stcentury American politicians Category21stcentury American writers Category21stcentury Baptists CategoryAlumni of University College, Oxford CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to Haiti CategoryArkansas Attorneys General CategoryAmerican autobiographers CategoryArkansas Democrats CategoryAmerican gun control advocates CategoryAmerican health activists CategoryAmerican humanitarians CategoryArkansas lawyers CategoryAmerican male writers CategoryAmerican memoirists CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of Irish descent CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryAmerican people of Scottish descent CategoryAmerican political writers CategoryAmerican Rhodes Scholars CategoryAmerican saxophonists CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryBaptists from the United States CategoryCandidates in United States elections, 1980 CategoryClinton Foundation people CategoryCollars of the Order of the White Lion CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party state governors of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryDisbarred lawyers CategoryEdmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service alumni CategoryFamily of Bill and Hillary Clinton CategoryFellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences CategoryFellows of University College, Oxford CategoryGovernors of Arkansas CategoryGrammy Award winners CategoryGrand Companions of the Order of Logohu CategoryGrand Crosses of the National Order of Honour and Merit CategoryHot Springs High School alumni CategoryImpeached Presidents of the United States CategoryLewinsky scandal CategoryLGBT rights activists from the United States CategoryLiving people CategoryPeople from Hope, Arkansas CategoryPeople from Hot Springs, Arkansas CategoryPhi Beta Kappa members CategoryPolitical careers by person CategoryPoliticians from Little Rock, Arkansas CategoryPresidential Medal of Freedom recipients CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRecipients of St. Georges Order of Victory CategoryRecipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class CategoryRecipients of the Presidential Medal of Distinction of Israel CategoryRodham family CategorySpouses of New York politicians CategorySpouses of United States Cabinet members CategorySpouses of United States Senators CategoryUnited Nations officials CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1992 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1996 CategoryUnited States presidential electors, 2016 CategoryUniversity of Arkansas faculty CategoryWriters from Arkansas CategoryYale Law Schoolalumni
John Calvin Coolidge Jr. was the 30th President of the United States . A Republican lawyer from Vermont, Coolidge worked his way up the ladder of Massachusetts state politics, eventually becoming governor of that state. His response to the Boston Police Strike of 1919 thrust him into the national spotlight and gave him a reputation as a man of decisive action. Soon after, he was elected as the 29th vice president in 1920 and succeeded to the presidency upon the sudden death of Warren G. Harding in 1923. Elected in his own right in 1924, he gained a reputation as a smallgovernment conservative, and also as a man who said very little, although having a rather dry sense of humor. Coolidge restored public confidence in the White House after the scandals of his predecessors administration, and left office with considerable popularity. As a Coolidge biographer wrote, He embodied the spirit and hopes of the middle class, could interpret their longings and express their opinions. That he did represent the genius of the average is the most convincing proof of his strength. Coolidges retirement was relatively short, as he died at the age of 60 in January 1933, less than two months before his immediate successor, Herbert Hoover, left office. Although his reputation underwent a renaissance during the Reagan administration, modern assessments of Coolidges presidency are divided. He is adulated among advocates of smaller government and laissezfaire supporters of an active central government generally view him less favorably, while both sides praise his stalwart support of racial equality. Birth and family history Coolidge as an Amherst College undergraduate John Calvin Coolidge Jr. was born in Plymouth Notch, Windsor County, Vermont, on July 4, 1872, the only U.S. president to be born on Independence Day. He was the elder of the two children of John Calvin Coolidge Sr. and Victoria Josephine Moor . Coolidge Senior engaged in many occupations, but developed a statewide reputation as a prosperous farmer, storekeeper and public servant. He held various local offices, including justice of the peace and tax collector and served in the Vermont House of Representatives as well as the Vermont Senate. Coolidges mother was the daughter of a Plymouth Notch farmer. She was chronically ill and died, perhaps from tuberculosis, when Coolidge was twelve years old. His younger sister, Abigail Grace Coolidge , died at the age of fifteen, probably of appendicitis, when Coolidge was eighteen. Coolidges father remarried in 1891, to a schoolteacher, and lived to the age of eighty. Coolidges family had deep roots in New England his earliest American ancestor, John Coolidge, emigrated from Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, England, around 1630 and settled in Watertown, Massachusetts. Another ancestor, Edmund Rice, arrived at Watertown in 1638. Coolidges greatgreatgrandfather, also named John Coolidge, was an American military officer in the Revolutionary War and one of the first selectmen of the town of Plymouth Notch. His grandfather Calvin Galusha Coolidge served in the Vermont House of Representatives. Coolidge was also a descendant of Samuel Appleton, who settled in Ipswich and led the Colony during King Philips War. Roberts, Gary Boyd. Ancestors of American Presidents. New England Historic Genealogical Society, 1995, p. 199. Many of Coolidges ancestors were farmers, and numerous distant cousins were prominent in politics. Early career and marriage Prof. Charles Edward Garman Education and law practice Coolidge attended Black River Academy and then St. Johnsbury Academy, before enrolling at Amherst College, where he distinguished himself in the debating class, as a senior joined the fraternity Phi Gamma Delta and graduated cum laude . While there, Coolidge was profoundly influenced by philosophy professor Charles Edward Garman, a Congregational mystic, with a neoHegelian philosophy. Coolidge explained Garmans ethics forty years later, there is a standard of righteousness that might does not make right, that the end does not justify the means, and that expediency as a working principle is bound to fail. The only hope of perfecting human relationships is in accordance with the law of service under which men are not so solicitous about what they shall get as they are about what they shall give. Yet people are entitled to the rewards of their industry. What they earn is theirs, no matter how small or how great. But the possession of property carries the obligation to use it in a larger service... At his fathers urging after graduation, Coolidge moved to Northampton, Massachusetts to become a lawyer. To avoid the cost of law school, Coolidge followed the common practice of apprenticing with a local law firm, Hammond Field, and reading law with them. John C. Hammond and Henry P. Field, both Amherst graduates, introduced Coolidge to law practice in the county seat of Hampshire County. In 1897, Coolidge was admitted to the Massachusetts bar, becoming a country lawyer. With his savings and a small inheritance from his grandfather, Coolidge opened his own law office in Northampton in 1898. He practiced commercial law, believing that he served his clients best by staying out of court. As his reputation as a hardworking and diligent attorney grew, local banks and other businesses began to retain his services. Marriage and family Grace Coolidge In 1903, Coolidge met Grace Anna Goodhue, a University of Vermont graduate and teacher at Northamptons Clarke School for the Deaf. They married on October 4, 1905 at 230p.m. in a small ceremony which took place in the parlor of Graces familys house, following a vain effort at postponement by Graces mother she was never enamored with Coolidge, nor he with her. The newlyweds went on a honeymoon trip to Montreal, originally planned for two weeks but cut short by a week at Coolidges request. After 25 years he wrote of Grace, for almost a quarter of a century she has borne with my infirmities and I have rejoiced in her graces. The Coolidges had two sons John and Calvin Jr. . Calvins death at age 16 from blood poisoning brought on by an infected blister hurt him terribly, according to son John. John became a railroad executive, helped to start the Coolidge Foundation, and was instrumental in creating the President Calvin Coolidge State Historic Site. Coolidge was frugal, and when it came to securing a home, he insisted upon renting. Henry Field had a pew in Edwards Congregational Church, and Grace was a member, but Coolidge never formally joined the congregation. Local political office City offices The Republican Party was dominant in New England in Coolidges time, and he followed Hammonds and Fields example by becoming active in local politics. In 1896, Coolidge campaigned for Republican presidential candidate William McKinley, and the next year he was selected to be a member of the Republican City Committee. In 1898, he won election to the City Council of Northampton, placing second in a ward where the top three candidates were elected. The position offered no salary, but provided Coolidge invaluable political experience. In 1899, he declined renomination, running instead for City Solicitor, a position elected by the City Council. He was elected for a oneyear term in 1900, and reelected in 1901. This position gave Coolidge more experience as a lawyer and paid a salary of 600. In 1902, the city council selected a Democrat for city solicitor, and Coolidge returned to private practice. Soon thereafter, however, the clerk of courts for the county died, and Coolidge was chosen to replace him. The position paid well, but it barred him from practicing law, so he remained at the job for only one year. In 1904, Coolidge suffered his sole defeat at the ballot box, losing an election to the Northampton school board. When told that some of his neighbors voted against him because he had no children in the schools he would govern, Coolidge replied, Might give me time State legislator and mayor In 1906, the local Republican committee nominated Coolidge for election to the state House of Representatives. He won a close victory over the incumbent Democrat, and reported to Boston for the 1907 session of the Massachusetts General Court. In his freshman term, Coolidge served on minor committees and, although he usually voted with the party, was known as a Progressive Republican, voting in favor of such measures as womens suffrage and the direct election of Senators. While in Boston, Coolidge became an ally, and then a liegeman, of then U.S. Senator Winthrop Murray Crane who controlled the western faction of the Massachusetts Republican Party Cranes party rival in the east of the commonwealth was U.S. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge. Another key strategic alliance which Coolidge forged was with Guy Currier, who had served in both state houses and had the social distinction, wealth, personal charm and broad circle of friends which Coolidge lacked, and which would have a lasting impact on his political career. In 1907, he was elected to a second term, and in the 1908 session, Coolidge was more outspoken, though not in a leadership position. Instead of vying for another term in the State House, Coolidge returned home to his growing family and ran for mayor of Northampton when the incumbent Democrat retired. He was well liked in the town, and defeated his challenger by a vote of 1,597 to 1,409. During his first term , he increased teachers salaries and retired some of the citys debt while still managing to effect a slight tax decrease. He was renominated in 1911, and defeated the same opponent by a slightly larger margin. In 1911, the State Senator for the Hampshire County area retired and successfully encouraged Coolidge to run for his seat for the 1912 session Coolidge defeated his Democratic opponent by a large margin. At the start of that term, he became chairman of a committee to arbitrate the Bread and Roses strike by the workers of the American Woolen Company in Lawrence, Massachusetts. After two tense months, the company agreed to the workers demands, in a settlement proposed by the committee. A major issue affecting Massachusetts Republicans that year was the party split between the progressive wing, which favored Theodore Roosevelt, and the conservative wing, which favored William Howard Taft. Although he favored some progressive measures, Coolidge refused to leave the Republican party. When the new Progressive Party declined to run a candidate in his state senate district, Coolidge won reelection against his Democratic opponent by an increased margin. Do the days work. If it be to protect the rights of the weak, whoever objects, do it. If it be to help a powerful corporation better to serve the people, whatever the opposition, do that. Expect to be called a standpatter, but dont be a standpatter. Expect to be called a demagogue, but dont be a demagogue. Dont hesitate to be as revolutionary as science. Dont hesitate to be as reactionary as the multiplication table. Dont expect to build up the weak by pulling down the strong. Dont hurry to legislate. Give administration a chance to catch up with legislation. Have Faith in Massachusetts as delivered by Calvin Coolidge to the Massachusetts State Senate, 1914. In the 1913 session, Coolidge enjoyed renowned success in arduously navigating to passage the Western Trolley Act which connected Northampton with a dozen similar industrial communities in western Massachusetts. Coolidge intended to retire after his second term as was the custom, but when the President of the State Senate, Levi H. Greenwood, considered running for Lieutenant Governor, Coolidge decided to run again for the Senate in the hopes of being elected as its presiding officer. Although Greenwood later decided to run for reelection to the Senate, he was defeated primarily due to his opposition to womens suffrage Coolidge was in favor of the womens vote, won his own reelection and with Cranes help, assumed the presidency of a closely divided Senate. After his election in January 1914, Coolidge delivered a published and frequently quoted speech entitled Have Faith in Massachusetts , which summarized his philosophy of government. Coolidges speech was well received, and he attracted some admirers on its account towards the end of the term, many of them were proposing his name for nomination to lieutenant governor. After winning reelection to the Senate by an increased margin in the 1914 elections, Coolidge was reelected unanimously to be President of the Senate. Coolidges supporters, led by fellow Amherst alumnus Frank Stearns, encouraged him again to run for lieutenant governor. Stearns, an executive with the Boston department store R. H. Stearns, became another key ally, and began a publicity campaign on Coolidges behalf before he announced his candidacy at the end of the 1915 legislative session. Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts Calvin and Grace Coolidge, about 1918 Coolidge entered the primary election for lieutenant governor and was nominated to run alongside gubernatorial candidate Samuel W. McCall. Coolidge was the leading votegetter in the Republican primary, and balanced the Republican ticket by adding a western presence to McCalls eastern base of support. McCall and Coolidge won the 1915 election to their respective oneyear terms, with Coolidge defeating his opponent by more than 50,000 votes. In Massachusetts, the lieutenant governor does not preside over the state Senate, as is the case in many other states nevertheless, as lieutenant governor, Coolidge was a deputy governor functioning as administrative inspector and was a member of the governors council. He was also chairman of the finance committee and the pardons committee. As a fulltime elected official, Coolidge discontinued his law practice in 1916, though his family continued to live in Northampton. McCall and Coolidge were both reelected in 1916 and again in 1917. When McCall decided that he would not stand for a fourth term, Coolidge announced his intention to run for governor. 1918 election Coolidge was unopposed for the Republican nomination for Governor of Massachusetts in 1918. He and his running mate, Channing Cox, a Boston lawyer and Speaker of the Massachusetts House of Representatives, ran on the previous administrations record fiscal conservatism, a vague opposition to Prohibition, support for womens suffrage, and support for American involvement in World War I. The issue of the war proved divisive, especially among Irish and German Americans. Coolidge was elected by a margin of 16,773 votes over his opponent, Richard H. Long, in the smallest margin of victory of any of his statewide campaigns. Boston Police Strike In 1919, in reaction to a plan of the policemen of the Boston Police Department to register with a union, Police Commissioner Edwin U. Curtis announced that such an act would not be tolerated. In August of that year, the American Federation of Labor issued a charter to the Boston Police Union. Curtis declared the unions leaders were guilty of insubordination and would be relieved of duty, but indicated he would cancel their suspension if the union was dissolved by September 4. The mayor of Boston, Andrew Peters, convinced Curtis to delay his action for a few days, but with no results, and Curtis suspended the union leaders on September 8. The following day, about threequarters of the policemen in Boston went on strike. Coolidge, tacitly but fully in support of Curtis position, closely monitored the situation but initially deferred to the local authorities. He anticipated that only a resulting measure of lawlessness could sufficiently prompt the public to understand and appreciate the controlling principle that a policeman does not strike. That night and the next, there was sporadic violence and rioting in the unruly city. Peters, concerned about sympathy strikes by the firemen and others, called up some units of the Massachusetts National Guard stationed in the Boston area pursuant to an old and obscure legal authority, and relieved Curtis of duty. Your assertion that the Commissioner was wrong cannot justify the wrong of leaving the city unguarded. That furnished the opportunity the criminal element furnished the action. There is no right to strike against the public safety by anyone, anywhere, any time. ... I am equally determined to defend the sovereignty of Massachusetts and to maintain the authority and jurisdiction over her public officers where it has been placed by the Constitution and laws of her people. Telegram from Governor Calvin Coolidge to Samuel Gompers September 14, 1919. Coolidge, sensing the severity of circumstances were then in need of his intervention, conferred with Cranes operative, William Butler, and then acted. He called up more units of the National Guard, restored Curtis to office, and took personal control of the police force. Curtis proclaimed that all of the strikers were fired from their jobs, and Coolidge called for a new police force to be recruited. That night Coolidge received a telegram from AFL leader Samuel Gompers. Whatever disorder has occurred, Gompers wrote, is due to Curtiss order in which the right of the policemen has been denied Coolidge publicly answered Gomperss telegram, denying any justification whatsoever for the strike and his response launched him into the national consciousness . Newspapers across the nation picked up on Coolidges statement and he became the newest hero to opponents of the strike. In the midst of the First Red Scare, many Americans were terrified of the spread of communist revolution, like those that had taken place in Russia, Hungary, and Germany. While Coolidge had lost some friends among organized labor, conservatives across the nation had seen a rising star. Although he usually acted with deliberation, the Boston police strike gave him a national reputation as a decisive leader, and as a strict enforcer of law and order. 1919 election Coolidge inspects militia in Boston police strike Coolidge and Cox were renominated for their respective offices in 1919. By this time Coolidges supporters had publicized his actions in the Police Strike around the state and the nation and some of Coolidges speeches were published in book form. He faced the same opponent as in 1918, Richard Long, but this time Coolidge defeated him by 125,101 votes, more than seven times his margin of victory from a year earlier. His actions in the police strike, combined with the massive electoral victory, led to suggestions that Coolidge run for president in 1920. Legislation and vetoes as governor By the time Coolidge was inaugurated on January 2, 1919, the First World War had ended, and Coolidge pushed the legislature to give a 100 bonus to Massachusetts veterans. He also signed a bill reducing the work week for women and children from fiftyfour hours to fortyeight, saying, We must humanize the industry, or the system will break down. He signed into law a budget that kept the tax rates the same, while trimming 4 million from expenditures, thus allowing the state to retire some of its debt. Coolidge also wielded the veto pen as governor. His most publicized veto prevented an increase in legislators pay by 50. Although Coolidge was personally opposed to Prohibition, he vetoed a bill in May 1920 that would have allowed the sale of beer or wine of 2.75 alcohol or less, in Massachusetts in violation of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Opinions and instructions do not outmatch the Constitution, he said in his veto message. Against it, they are void. Vice presidency 1920 election At the 1920 Republican National Convention, most of the delegates were selected by state party conventions, not primaries. As such, the field was divided among many local favorites. Coolidge was one such candidate, and while he placed as high as sixth in the voting, the powerful party bosses running the convention, primarily the partys U.S. Senators, never considered him seriously. After ten ballots, the bosses and then the delegates settled on Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio as their nominee for president. When the time came to select a vice presidential nominee, the bosses also made and announced their decision on whom they wanted Sen. Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsin and then prematurely departed after his name was put forth, relying on the rank and file to confirm their decision. A delegate from Oregon, Wallace McCamant, having read Have Faith in Massachusetts , proposed Coolidge for vice president instead. The suggestion caught on quickly with the masses starving for an act of independence from the absent bosses, and Coolidge was unexpectedly nominated. The Democrats nominated another Ohioan, James M. Cox, for president and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt, for vice president. The question of the United States joining the League of Nations was a major issue in the campaign, as was the unfinished legacy of Progressivism. Harding ran a frontporch campaign from his home in Marion, Ohio, but Coolidge took to the campaign trail in the Upper South, New York, and New England his audiences carefully limited to those familiar with Coolidge and those placing a premium upon concise and short speeches. On November 2, 1920, Harding and Coolidge were victorious in a landslide, winning more than 60 percent of the popular vote, including every state outside the South. They also won in Tennessee, the first time a Republican ticket had won a Southern state since Reconstruction. Silent Cal President Harding and Vice President Coolidge and their wives The U.S. vice presidency did not carry many official duties, but Coolidge was invited by President Harding to attend cabinet meetings, making him the first vice president to do so. He gave a number of unremarkable speeches around the country. As the U.S. vice president, Coolidge and his vivacious wife Grace were invited to quite a few parties, where the legend of Silent Cal was born. It is from this time that most of the jokes and anecdotes involving Coolidge originate. Although Coolidge was known to be a skilled and effective public speaker, in private he was a man of few words and was commonly referred to as Silent Cal. A possibly apocryphal story has it that a matron, seated next to him at a dinner, said to him, I made a bet today that I could get more than two words out of you. He replied, You lose. Dorothy Parker, upon learning that Coolidge had died, reportedly remarked, How can they tell Coolidge often seemed uncomfortable among fashionable Washington society when asked why he continued to attend so many of their dinner parties, he replied, Got to eat somewhere. Alice Roosevelt Longworth, a leading Republican wit, underscored Coolidges silence and his dour personality When he wished he were elsewhere, he pursed his lips, folded his arms, and said nothing. He looked then precisely as though he had been weaned on a pickle. As president, Coolidges reputation as a quiet man continued. The words of a President have an enormous weight, he would later write, and ought not to be used indiscriminately. Coolidge was aware of his stiff reputation indeed, he cultivated it. I think the American people want a solemn ass as a President, he once told Ethel Barrymore, and I think I will go along with them. Some historians would later suggest that Coolidges image was created deliberately as a campaign tactic, while others believe his withdrawn and quiet behavior to be natural, deepening after the death of his son in 1924. Presidency On August 2, 1923, President Harding died unexpectedly in San Francisco while on a speaking tour of the western United States. Vice President Coolidge was in Vermont visiting his family home, which had neither electricity nor a telephone, when he received word by messenger of Hardings death. He dressed, said a prayer, and came downstairs to greet the reporters who had assembled. His father, a notary public and justice of the peace, administered the oath of office in the familys parlor by the light of a kerosene lamp at 247a.m. on August 3, 1923 President Coolidge then went back to bed. Coolidge returned to Washington the next day, and was sworn in again by Justice Adolph A. Hoehling Jr. of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, to forestall any questions about the authority of a state official to administer a federal oath. This second oath taking remained a secret until it was revealed by Harry M. Daugherty in 1932, and confirmed by Hoehling. When Hoehling confirmed Daughertys story, he indicated that Daugherty, then serving as United States Attorney General, asked him to administer the oath without fanfare at the Willard Hotel. According to Hoehling, he did not question Daughertys reason for requesting a second oath taking, but assumed it was to resolve any doubt about whether the first swearing in was valid. President Coolidge signing appropriation bills for the Veterans Bureau on the South Lawn during the garden party for wounded veterans, June 5, 1924. General John J. Pershing is at left. The man at right, looking on, appears to be Veterans Bureau Director Frank T. Hines. The nation initially did not know what to make of Coolidge, who had maintained a low profile in the Harding administration many had even expected him to be replaced on the ballot in 1924. Coolidge believed that those of Hardings men under suspicion were entitled to every presumption of innocence, taking a methodical approach to the scandals, principally the Teapot Dome scandal, while others clamored for rapid punishment of those they presumed guilty. Coolidge thought the Senate investigations of the scandals would suffice this was affirmed by the resulting resignations of those involved. He personally intervened in demanding the resignation of Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty after he refused to cooperate with the congressional probe. He then set about to confirm that no loose ends remained in the administration, arranging for a full briefing on the wrongdoing. Harry A. Slattery reviewed the facts with him, Harlan F. Stone analyzed the legal aspects for him and Senator William E. Borah assessed and presented the political factors. Coolidge addressed Congress when it reconvened on December 6, 1923, giving a speech that supported many of Hardings policies, including Hardings formal budgeting process, the enforcement of immigration restrictions and arbitration of coal strikes ongoing in Pennsylvania. Coolidges speech was the first presidential speech to be broadcast over the radio. The Washington Naval Treaty was proclaimed just one month into Coolidges term, and was generally well received in the country. In May 1924, the World War I veterans World War Adjusted Compensation Act or Bonus Bill was passed over his veto. Coolidge signed the Immigration Act later that year, which was aimed at restricting southern and eastern European immigration, but appended a signing statement expressing his unhappiness with the bills specific exclusion of Japanese immigrants. Just before the Republican Convention began, Coolidge signed into law the Revenue Act of 1924, which reduced the top marginal tax rate from 58 to 46, as well as personal income tax rates across the board, increased the estate tax and bolstered it with a new gift tax. On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the act granting citizenship to all Native Americans born in the United States. By that time, twothirds of the people were already citizens, having gained it through marriage, military service , or the land allotments that had earlier taken place. Alysa Landry, Calvin Coolidge First Sitting Prez Adopted by Tribe Starts Desecration of Mount Rushmore, Indian Country Today, 26 July 2016 accessed same day 1924 election 1924 electoral vote results The Republican Convention was held on June 10 12, 1924, in Cleveland, Ohio Coolidge was nominated on the first ballot. The convention nominated Frank Lowden of Illinois for vice president on the second ballot, but he declined former Brigadier General Charles G. Dawes was nominated on the third ballot and accepted. The Democrats held their convention the next month in New York City. The convention soon deadlocked, and after 103 ballots, the delegates finally agreed on a compromise candidate, John W. Davis, with Charles W. Bryan nominated for vice president. The Democrats hopes were buoyed when Robert M. La Follette Sr., a Republican senator from Wisconsin, split from the GOP to form a new Progressive Party. Many believed that the split in the Republican party, like the one in 1912, would allow a Democrat to win the presidency. After the conventions and the death of his younger son Calvin, Coolidge became withdrawn he later said that when he son died, the power and glory of the Presidency went with him. Even as he mourned, Coolidge ran his standard campaign, not mentioning his opponents by name or maligning them, and delivering speeches on his theory of government, including several that were broadcast over radio. It was the most subdued campaign since 1896, partly because of Coolidges grief, but also because of his naturally nonconfrontational style. The other candidates campaigned in a more modern fashion, but despite the split in the Republican party, the results were similar to those of 1920. Coolidge and Dawes won every state outside the South except Wisconsin, La Follettes home state. Coolidge won the election with 382 electoral votes and the popular vote by 2.5million over his opponents combined total. Industry and trade it is probable that a press which maintains an intimate touch with the business currents of the nation is likely to be more reliable than it would be if it were a stranger to these influences. After all, the chief business of the American people is business . They are profoundly concerned with buying, selling, investing and prospering in the world. President Calvin Coolidges address to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, Washington D.C., January 25, 1925. During Coolidges presidency, the United States experienced a period of rapid economic growth known as the Roaring Twenties. He left the administrations industrial policy in the hands of his activist Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover, who energetically used government auspices to promote business efficiency and develop airlines and radio. Coolidge disdained regulation, and demonstrated this by appointing commissioners to the Federal Trade Commission and the Interstate Commerce Commission who did little to restrict the activities of businesses under their jurisdiction. The regulatory state under Coolidge was, as one biographer described it, thin to the point of invisibility. Coolidges economic policy has often been misquoted as generally speaking, the business of the American people is business . Some have criticized Coolidge as an adherent of the laissezfaire ideology, which they claim led to the Great Depression. On the other hand, historian Robert Sobel offers some context based on Coolidges sense of federalism As Governor of Massachusetts, Coolidge supported wages and hours legislation, opposed child labor, imposed economic controls during World War I, favored safety measures in factories, and even worker representation on corporate boards. Did he support these measures while president No, because in the 1920s, such matters were considered the responsibilities of state and local governments. Taxation and government spending Coolidge adopted the taxation policies of his Secretary of the Treasury, Andrew Mellon, the idea that scientific taxation, lower taxes, increase rather than decrease government receipts. Congress agreed, and tax rates were reduced in Coolidges term. In addition to federal tax cuts, Coolidge proposed reductions in federal expenditures and retiring of the federal debt. Coolidges ideas were shared by the Republicans in Congress, and in 1924, Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1924, which reduced income tax rates and eliminated all income taxation for some two million people. They reduced taxes again by passing the Revenue Acts of 1926 and 1928, all the while continuing to keep spending down so as to reduce the overall federal debt. By 1927, only the wealthiest 2 of taxpayers paid any federal income tax. Federal spending remained flat during Coolidges administration, allowing onefourth of the federal debt to be retired in total. State and local governments saw considerable growth, however, surpassing the federal budget in 1927. Opposition to farm subsidies Coolidge with his vice president, Charles G. Dawes Perhaps the most contentious issue of Coolidges presidency was relief for farmers. Some in Congress proposed a bill designed to fight falling agricultural prices by allowing the federal government to purchase crops to sell abroad at lower prices. Agriculture Secretary Henry C. Wallace and other administration officials favored the bill when it was introduced in 1924, but rising prices convinced many in Congress that the bill was unnecessary, and it was defeated just before the elections that year. In 1926, with farm prices falling once more, Senator Charles L. McNary and Representative Gilbert N. Haugen both Republicans proposed the McNary Haugen Farm Relief Bill. The bill proposed a federal farm board that would purchase surplus production in highyield years and hold it for later sale or sell it abroad. Coolidge opposed McNaryHaugen, declaring that agriculture must stand on an independent business basis, and said that government control cannot be divorced from political control. Instead of manipulating prices, he favored instead Herbert Hoovers proposal to create profits by modernizing agriculture. Secretary Mellon wrote a letter denouncing the McNaryHaugen measure as unsound and likely to cause inflation, and it was defeated. After McNaryHaugens defeat, Coolidge supported a less radical measure, the CurtisCrisp Act, which would have created a federal board to lend money to farm cooperatives in times of surplus the bill did not pass. In February 1927, Congress took up the McNaryHaugen bill again, this time narrowly passing it, and Coolidge vetoed it. In his veto message, he expressed the belief that the bill would do nothing to help farmers, benefiting only exporters and expanding the federal bureaucracy. Congress did not override the veto, but it passed the bill again in May 1928 by an increased majority again, Coolidge vetoed it. Farmers never have made much money, said Coolidge, the Vermont farmers son. I do not believe we can do much about it. Flood control Coolidge has often been criticized for his actions during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, the worst natural disaster to hit the Gulf Coast until Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Although he did eventually name Secretary Hoover to a commission in charge of flood relief, scholars argue that Coolidge overall showed a lack of interest in federal flood control. Coolidge did not believe that personally visiting the region after the floods would accomplish anything, and that it would be seen as mere political grandstanding. He also did not want to incur the federal spending that flood control would require he believed property owners should bear much of the cost. On the other hand, Congress wanted a bill that would place the federal government completely in charge of flood mitigation. When Congress passed a compromise measure in 1928, Coolidge declined to take credit for it and signed the bill in private on May 15. Racial Minorities Osage men with Coolidge after he signed the bill granting Native Americans U.S. citizenship. According to one biographer, Coolidge was devoid of racial prejudice, but rarely took the lead on civil rights. Coolidge disliked the Ku Klux Klan and no Klansman is known to have received an appointment from him. In the 1924 presidential election his opponents , and his running mate Charles Dawes, often attacked the Klan but Coolidge avoided the subject, just as he avoided most controversial topics. Coolidge spoke in favor of the civil rights of AfricanAmericans, saying in his first State of the Union address that their rights were just as sacred as those of any other citizen under the U.S. Constitution and that it was a public and a private duty to protect those rights.sCalvin Coolidges First State of the Union Address Coolidge repeatedly called for laws to make lynching a federal crime . Congress refused to pass any such legislation. On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the Indian Citizenship Act, which granted U.S. citizenship to all American Indians living on reservations . On June 6, 1924, Coolidge delivered a commencement address at historically black, nonsegregated Howard University, in which he thanked and commended AfricanAmericans for their rapid advances in education and their contributions to U.S. society over the years, as well as their eagerness to render their services as soldiers in the World War, all while being faced with discrimination and prejudices at home. In a speech in October 1924, Coolidge stressed tolerance of differences as an American value and thanked immigrants for their contributions to U.S. society, saying that they have contributed much to making our country what it is. He stated that although the diversity of peoples was a detrimental source of conflict and tension in Europe, it was peculiar for the United States that it was a harmonious benefit for the country. Coolidge further stated the United States should assist and help immigrants who come to the country, and urged immigrants to reject race hatreds and prejudices. Foreign policy Official portrait of Calvin Coolidge Although not an isolationist, Coolidge was reluctant to enter into foreign alliances. He considered the 1920 Republican victory as a rejection of the Wilsonian position that the United States should join the League of Nations. While not completely opposed to the idea, Coolidge believed the League, as then constituted, did not serve American interests, and he did not advocate membership. He spoke in favor of the United States joining the Permanent Court of International Justice , provided that the nation would not be bound by advisory decisions. In 1926, the Senate eventually approved joining the Court . The League of Nations accepted the reservations, but it suggested some modifications of its own. The Senate failed to act the United States never joined the World Court. Coolidges primary initiative was the Kellogg Briand Pact of 1928, named for Coolidges Secretary of State, Frank B. Kellogg, and French foreign minister Aristide Briand. The treaty, ratified in 1929, committed signatories the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, and Japan to renounce war, as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one another. The treaty did not achieve its intended result the outlawry of war but it did provide the founding principle for international law after World War II. Coolidge continued the previous administrations policy of withholding recognition of the Soviet Union. He also continued the United States support for the elected government of Mexico against the rebels there, lifting the arms embargo on that country. He sent Dwight Morrow to Mexico as the American ambassador. The United States occupation of Nicaragua and Haiti continued under his administration, but Coolidge withdrew American troops from the Dominican Republic in 1924. Coolidge led the U.S. delegation to the Sixth International Conference of American States, January 15 17, 1928, in Havana, Cuba. This was the only international trip Coolidge made during his presidency. There, he extended an olive branch to Latin American leaders embittered over Americas interventionist policies in Central America and the Caribbean. For 88 years he was the only sitting president to have visited Cuba, until Barack Obama did so in 2016. 1928 election Collection of video clips of President Coolidge In the summer of 1927, Coolidge vacationed in the Black Hills of South Dakota, where he engaged in horseback riding and fly fishing and attended rodeos. He made Custer State Park his summer White House. While on vacation, Coolidge surprisingly issued a terse statement that he would not seek a second full term as president I do not choose to run for President in 1928. After allowing the reporters to take that in, Coolidge elaborated. If I take another term, I will be in the White House till 1933 Ten years in Washington is longer than any other man has had it too long In his memoirs, Coolidge explained his decision not to run The Presidential office takes a heavy toll of those who occupy it and those who are dear to them. While we should not refuse to spend and be spent in the service of our country, it is hazardous to attempt what we feel is beyond our strength to accomplish. After leaving office, he and Grace returned to Northampton, where he wrote his memoirs. The Republicans retained the White House in 1928 in the person of Coolidges Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover. Coolidge had been reluctant to endorse Hoover as his successor on one occasion he remarked that for six years that man has given me unsolicited advice all of it bad. Even so, Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing the nomination of the popular commerce secretary. Cabinet Coolidges cabinet in 1924, outside the White HouseFront row, left to right Harry Stewart New, John W. Weeks, Charles Evans Hughes, Coolidge, Andrew Mellon, Harlan F. Stone, Curtis D. WilburBack row, left to right, James J. Davis, Henry C. Wallace, Herbert Hoover, Hubert Work Although a few of Hardings cabinet appointees were scandaltarred, Coolidge initially retained all of them, out of an ardent conviction that as successor to a deceased elected president he was obligated to retain Hardings counselors and policies until the next election. He kept Hardings able speechwriter Judson T. Welliver Stuart Crawford replaced Welliver in November 1925. Coolidge appointed C. Bascom Slemp, a Virginia Congressman and experienced federal politician, to work jointly with Edward T. Clark, a Massachusetts Republican organizer whom he retained from his vicepresidential staff, as Secretaries to the President . Perhaps the most powerful person in Coolidges Cabinet was Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, who controlled the administrations financial policies and was regarded by many, including House Minority Leader John Nance Garner, as more powerful than Coolidge himself. Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover also held a prominent place in Coolidges Cabinet, in part because Coolidge found value in Hoovers ability to win positive publicity with his probusiness proposals. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes directed Coolidges foreign policy until he resigned in 1925 following Coolidges reelection. He was replaced by Frank B. Kellogg, who had previously served as a Senator and as the ambassador to Great Britain. Coolidge made two other appointments following his reelection, with William M. Jardine taking the position of Secretary of Agriculture and John G. Sargent becoming Attorney General. Coolidge did not have a vice president during his first term, but Charles Dawes became vice president during Coolidges second term, and Dawes and Coolidge clashed over farm policy and other issues. Judicial appointments Coolidge appointed Harlan Fiske Stone Attorney General and then Supreme Court Justice Coolidge appointed one justice to the Supreme Court of the United States, Harlan Fiske Stone in 1925. Stone was Coolidges fellow Amherst alumnus, a Wall Street lawyer and conservative Republican. Stone was serving as dean of Columbia Law School when Coolidge appointed him to be attorney general in 1924 to restore the reputation tarnished by Hardings Attorney General, Harry M. Daugherty. It does not appear that Coolidge considered appointing anyone other than Stone. Stone proved to be a firm believer in judicial restraint and was regarded as one of the courts three liberal justices who would often vote to uphold New Deal legislation. President Franklin D. Roosevelt later appointed Stone to be chief justice. Coolidge nominated 17 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 61 judges to the United States district courts. He appointed judges to various specialty courts as well, including Genevieve R. Cline, who became the first woman named to the federal judiciary when Coolidge placed her on the United States Customs Court in 1928. Coolidge also signed the Judiciary Act of 1925 into law, allowing the Supreme Court more discretion over its workload. Retirement and death Coolidge addressing a crowd at Arlington National Cemeterys Roman style Memorial Amphitheater in 1924. After his presidency, Coolidge retired to the modest rented house on residential Massasoit Street in Northampton before moving to a more spacious home, The Beeches. He kept a Hacker runabout boat on the Connecticut River and was often observed on the water by local boating enthusiasts. During this period, he also served as chairman of the nonpartisan Railroad Commission, as honorary president of the American Foundation for the Blind, as a director of New York Life Insurance Company, as president of the American Antiquarian Society, and as a trustee of Amherst College. Coolidge published his autobiography in 1929 and wrote a syndicated newspaper column, Calvin Coolidge Says, from 1930 to 1931. Faced with looming defeat in the 1932 presidential election, some Republicans spoke of rejecting Herbert Hoover as their partys nominee, and instead drafting Coolidge to run, but the former president made it clear that he was not interested in running again, and that he would publicly repudiate any effort to draft him, should it come about. Hoover was renominated, and Coolidge made several radio addresses in support of him. Hoover then lost the general election to Coolidges 1920 vice presidential Democratic opponent Franklin D. Roosevelt in a landslide. Coolidge died suddenly from coronary thrombosis at The Beeches, at 1245p.m., January 5, 1933. Shortly before his death, Coolidge confided to an old friend I feel I no longer fit in with these times. Coolidge is buried in Plymouth Notch Cemetery, Plymouth Notch, Vermont. The nearby family home is maintained as one of the original buildings on the Calvin Coolidge Homestead District site. The State of Vermont dedicated a new visitors center nearby to mark Coolidges 100th birthday on July 4, 1972. Radio, film, and commemorations Coolidge, reporters, and cameramen Despite his reputation as a quiet and even reclusive politician, Coolidge made use of the new medium of radio and made radio history several times while president. He made himself available to reporters, giving 520 press conferences, meeting with reporters more regularly than any president before or since. Coolidges second inauguration was the first presidential inauguration broadcast on radio. On December 6, 1923, he was the first president whose address to Congress was broadcast on radio. Coolidge signed the Radio Act of 1927, which assigned regulation of radio to the newly created Federal Radio Commission. On August 11, 1924, Theodore W. Case, using the Phonofilm soundonfilm process he developed for Lee DeForest, filmed Coolidge on the White House lawn, making Coolidge the first president to appear in a sound film. The title of the DeForest film was President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Grounds . When Charles Lindbergh arrived in Washington on a U.S. Navy ship after his celebrated 1927 transAtlantic flight, President Coolidge welcomed him back to the U.S. and a soundonfilm record of the event exists. FileSesquicentennial american independence half dollar commemorative obverse.jpgCoolidge was the only president to have his portrait on a coin during his lifetime, the Sesquicentennial of American Independence Half Dollar, minted in 1926. FileCalvin Coolidge 1938 Issue5.jpgCoolidge on a 1938 postage stamp See also Coolidge, Arizona Coolidge Dam Coolidge effect List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience Notes References Works cited Scholarly sources Articles and book chapters Primary sources Further reading External links White House biography Calvin Coolidge Presidential Library Museum Calvin Coolidge Presidential Foundation Text of a number of Coolidge speeches, Miller Center of Public Affairs Calvin Coolidge A Resource Guide, Library of Congress President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Ground , the first presidential film with sound recording Life Portrait of Calvin Coolidge, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , September 27, 1999 Calvin Coolidge Personal Manuscripts Category1872 births Category1933 deaths Category19thcentury Congregationalists Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury American writers Category20thcentury Congregationalists CategoryAmerican Congregationalists CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law CategoryAmerican libertarians CategoryAmerican male writers CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmherst College alumni CategoryAppleton family CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryChristian libertarians CategoryCollege Republicans CategoryConservatism in the United States Calvin CategoryGovernors of Massachusetts CategoryHarding administration cabinet members CategoryLieutenant Governors of Massachusetts CategoryMassachusetts city council members CategoryMassachusetts lawyers CategoryMassachusetts Republicans CategoryMassachusetts State Senators CategoryMayors of places in Massachusetts CategoryMembers of the Massachusetts House of Representatives CategoryOld Right CategoryPeople from Plymouth, Vermont CategoryPoliticians from Northampton, Massachusetts CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party state governors of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party vice presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategorySt. Johnsbury Academy alumni CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1920 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1924 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1932 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1920 CategoryVermont Republicans CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryWriters from Northampton, Massachusetts CategoryWriters fromVermont
Dwight David Eisenhower was an American Army general and statesman who served as the 34th President of the United States from 1953 to 1961. During World War II, he was a fivestar general in the United States Army and served as Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces in Europe. He was responsible for planning and supervising the invasion of North Africa in Operation Torch in 1942 43 and the successful invasion of France and Germany in 1944 45 from the Western Front. Eisenhower was born in Denison, Texas, and raised in Kansas in a large family of mostly Pennsylvania Dutch ancestry his parents had a strong religious background. His mother was born a Lutheran, married as a River Brethren and later joined the International Bible Students Association. Eisenhower did not belong to any organized church until 1952. He cited constant relocation during his military career as one reason. He graduated from West Point in 1915 and later married Mamie Doud, with whom he had two sons. During World War I, he was denied a request to serve in Europe and instead commanded a unit that trained tank crews. Following the war, he served under several notable generals and was promoted to the rank of brigadier general in 1941. After the U.S. entered World War II, Eisenhower oversaw the successful invasions of North Africa and Sicily before supervising the invasions of France and Germany. After the war, Eisenhower served as Army Chief of Staff and then took on the uncomfortable role as president of Columbia University. In 1951 52, he served as the first Supreme Commander of NATO. In 1952, Eisenhower entered the presidential race as a Republican in order to block the foreign policies of Senator Robert A. Taft. He won that election and the 1956 election in landslides, when he defeated Adlai Stevenson. He became the first Republican winner to accomplish this since 1928. Eisenhowers main goals in office were to contain the expansion of the Soviet Union and reduce federal deficits. In 1953, he threatened the use of nuclear weapons until China agreed to terms regarding POWs in the Korean War. An armistice ended the stalemated conflict. His New Look policy of nuclear deterrence prioritized inexpensive nuclear weapons while reducing funding for expensive Army divisions. He continued Harry S. Trumans policy of recognizing the Republic of China as the legitimate government of China, and he won congressional approval of the Formosa Resolution. His administration provided major aid to help the French fight off Vietnamese Communists in the First Indochina War. After the French left he gave strong financial support to the new state of South Vietnam. He supported local military coups against governments in Iran and Guatemala. During the Suez Crisis of 1956, Eisenhower condemned the Israeli, British and French invasion of Egypt, and forced them to withdraw. He also condemned the Soviet invasion during the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 but took no action. During the Syrian Crisis of 1957 he approved a CIAMI6 plan to stage fake border incidents as an excuse for an invasion by Syrias prowestern neighbours.After the Soviet Union launched Sputnik in 1957, Eisenhower authorized the establishment of NASA, which led to the space race. He deployed 15,000 soldiers during the 1958 Lebanon crisis. Near the end of his term, his efforts to set up a summit meeting with the Soviets collapsed when an American spy plane was shot down over Russia. He approved the Bay of Pigs invasion, which was left to his successor to carry out.Quirk, Robert E. . Fidel Castro. p. 303 New York and London W.W. Norton Company. . On the domestic front, Eisenhower was a moderate conservative who continued New Deal agencies and expanded Social Security. He covertly opposed Joseph McCarthy and contributed to the end of McCarthyism by openly invoking executive privilege. Eisenhower signed the Civil Rights Act of 1957 and sent Army troops to enforce federal court orders that integrated schools in Little Rock, Arkansas. His largest program was the Interstate Highway System. He promoted the establishment of strong science education via the National Defense Education Act. Eisenhowers two terms saw widespread economic prosperity except for a minor recession in 1958. In his farewell address to the nation, Eisenhower expressed his concerns about the dangers of massive military spending, particularly deficit spending and government contracts to private military manufacturers. He was voted Gallups most admired man twelve times and also achieved widespread popular esteem both in and out of office. Since the late 20th century, consensus among Western scholars has consistently held Eisenhower as one of the greatest U.S. Presidents. Early life and education The Eisenhower family home, Abilene, Kansas The Eisenhauer family migrated from Karlsbrunn in NassauSaarbrcken, to North America, first settling in York, Pennsylvania, in 1741, and in the 1880s moving to Kansas. Accounts vary as to how and when the German name Eisenhauer was anglicized to Eisenhower. Eisenhowers Pennsylvania Dutch ancestors, who were primarily farmers, included Hans Nikolaus Eisenhauer of Karlsbrunn, who migrated to Lancaster, Pennsylvania, in 1741. Hanss greatgreatgrandson, David Jacob Eisenhower , was Eisenhowers father and was a collegeeducated engineer, despite his own father Jacobs urging to stay on the family farm. Eisenhowers mother, Ida Elizabeth Eisenhower, born in Virginia, of German Protestant ancestry, moved to Kansas from Virginia. She married David on September 23, 1885, in Lecompton, Kansas, on the campus of their alma mater, Lane University. David owned a general store in Hope, Kansas, but the business failed due to economic conditions and the family became impoverished. The Eisenhowers then lived in Texas from 1889 until 1892, and later returned to Kansas, with 24 to their name at the time. David worked as a railroad mechanic and then at a creamery. By 1898, the parents made a decent living and provided a suitable home for their large family. The future president was born on October 14, 1890, in Denison, Texas, the third of seven boys. His mother originally named him David Dwight but reversed the two names after his birth to avoid the confusion of having two Davids in the family. All of the boys were called Ike, such as Big Ike and Little Ike the nickname was intended as an abbreviation of their last name. By World War II, only Dwight was still called Ike. In 1892, the family moved to Abilene, Kansas, which Eisenhower considered his home town. As a child, he was involved in an accident that cost his younger brother an eye he later referred to this as an experience that taught him the need to be protective of those under him. Dwight developed a keen and enduring interest in exploring outdoors, huntingfishing, cooking and card playing from an illiterate named Bob Davis who camped on the Smoky Hill River.DEste, Carlo . Eisenhower A Soldiers Life , p. 25. While Eisenhowers mother was against war, it was her collection of history books that first sparked Eisenhowers early and lasting interest in military history. He persisted in reading the books in her collection and became a voracious reader in the subject. Other favorite subjects early in his education were arithmetic and spelling. His parents set aside specific times at breakfast and at dinner for daily family Bible reading. Chores were regularly assigned and rotated among all the children, and misbehavior was met with unequivocal discipline, usually from David. His mother, previously a member of the River Brethren sect of the Mennonites, joined the International Bible Students Association, later known as Jehovahs Witnesses. The Eisenhower home served as the local meeting hall from 1896 to 1915, though Eisenhower never joined the International Bible Students.Bergman, Jerry. Steeped in Religion President Eisenhower and the Influence of the Jehovahs Witnesses, Kansas History . His later decision to attend West Point saddened his mother, who felt that warfare was rather wicked, but she did not overrule him.DEste, Carlo . Eisenhower A Soldiers Life , p. 58. While speaking of himself in 1948, Eisenhower said he was one of the most deeply religious men I know though unattached to any sect or organization. He was baptized in the Presbyterian Church in 1953.online Faith Staked Down, Time , February 9, 1953. Eisenhower attended Abilene High School and graduated with the class of 1909. As a freshman, he injured his knee and developed a leg infection that extended into his groin, and which his doctor diagnosed as lifethreatening. The doctor insisted that the leg be amputated but Dwight refused to allow it, and surprisingly recovered, though he had to repeat his freshman year. He and brother Edgar both wanted to attend college, though they lacked the funds. They made a pact to take alternate years at college while the other worked to earn the tuitions. Edgar took the first turn at school, and Dwight was employed as a night supervisor at the Belle Springs Creamery. Edgar asked for a second year, Dwight consented and worked for a second year. At that time, a friend Swede Hazlett was applying to the Naval Academy and urged Dwight to apply to the school, since no tuition was required. Eisenhower requested consideration for either Annapolis or West Point with his U.S. Senator, Joseph L. Bristow. Though Eisenhower was among the winners of the entranceexam competition, he was beyond the age limit for the Naval Academy. He then accepted an appointment to West Point in 1911. Eisenhower and Omar Bradley were members of the 1912 West Point football team. At West Point, Eisenhower relished the emphasis on traditions and on sports, but was less enthusiastic about the hazing, though he willingly accepted it as a plebe. He was also a regular violator of the more detailed regulations, and finished school with a less than stellar discipline rating. Academically, Eisenhowers best subject by far was English. Otherwise, his performance was average, though he thoroughly enjoyed the typical emphasis of engineering on science and mathematics. In athletics, Eisenhower later said that not making the baseball team at West Point was one of the greatest disappointments of my life, maybe my greatest. He made the varsity football team and was a starter as running back and linebacker in 1912, when he tackled the legendary Jim Thorpe of the Carlisle Indians. Eisenhower suffered a torn knee in that, his last, game he reinjured his knee on horseback and in the boxing ring,Eisenhower, Dwight D. . At Ease Stories I Tell to Friends , Garden City, New York, Doubleday Company, Inc. so he turned to fencing and gymnastics. Eisenhower later served as junior varsity football coach and cheerleader. At West Point he played football. He graduated in the middle of the class of 1915, which became known as the class the stars fell on, because 59 members eventually became general officers. Personal life While Eisenhower was stationed in Texas, he met Mamie Doud of Boone, Iowa. He and her family were also immediately taken with one another. He proposed to her on Valentines Day in 1916. A November wedding date in Denver was moved up to July 1 due to the pending U.S. entry into World War I. They moved many times during their first 35 years of marriage. The Eisenhowers had two sons. Doud Dwight Icky Eisenhower died of scarlet fever at the age of three. Eisenhower was mostly reticent to discuss his death. Their second son, John Eisenhower , was born in Denver, Colorado. John served in the United States Army, retired as a brigadier general, became an author and served as U.S. Ambassador to Belgium from 1969 to 1971. Coincidentally, John graduated from West Point on DDay, June 6, 1944. He married Barbara Jean Thompson on June 10, 1947. John and Barbara had four children David, Barbara Ann, Susan Elaine and Mary Jean. David, after whom Camp David is named, married Richard Nixons daughter Julie in 1968. Portrait of Mamie Eisenhower Eisenhower was a golf enthusiast later in life, and he joined the Augusta National Golf Club in 1948.Owen, David . The Making of the Masters Clifford Roberts, Augusta National, and Golfs Most Prestigious Tournament , Simon and Schuster, . He played golf frequently during and after his presidency and was unreserved in expressing his passion for the game, to the point of golfing during winter he ordered his golf balls painted black so he could see them better against snow on the ground. He had a small, basic golf facility installed at Camp David, and became close friends with the Augusta National Chairman Clifford Roberts, inviting Roberts to stay at the White House on several occasions. Roberts, an investment broker, also handled the Eisenhower familys investments. Roberts also advised Eisenhower on tax aspects of publishing his memoirs, which proved financially lucrative. Oil painting was one of Eisenhowers hobbies. While at Columbia University, he began the art after watching Thomas E. Stephens paint Mamies portrait. In order to relax, Eisenhower painted about 260 oils during the last 20 years of his life. The images were mostly landscapes, but also portraits of subjects such as Mamie, their grandchildren, General Montgomery, George Washington, and Abraham Lincoln. Wendy Beckett stated that Eisenhowers work, simple and earnest, rather cause us to wonder at the hidden depths of this reticent president. A conservative in both art and politics, he in a 1962 speech denounced modern art as a piece of canvas that looks like a brokendown Tin Lizzie, loaded with paint, has been driven over it. Angels in the Outfield was Eisenhowers favorite movie. His favorite reading material for relaxation were the Western novels of Zane Grey. With his excellent memory and ability to focus, Eisenhower was skilled at card games. He learned poker, which he called his favorite indoor sport, in Abilene. Eisenhower recorded West Point classmates poker losses for payment after graduation, and later stopped playing because his opponents resented having to pay him. A classmate reported that after learning to play contract bridge at West Point, Eisenhower played the game six nights a week for five months. Eisenhower continued to play bridge throughout his military career. While stationed in the Philippines, he played regularly with President Manuel Quezon, and was dubbed The bridge wizard of Manila. During WWII, an unwritten qualification for an officers appointment to Eisenhowers staff was the ability to play a sound game of bridge. He played even during the stressful weeks leading up to the DDay landings. His favorite partner was General Alfred Gruenther, considered the best player in the U.S. Army he appointed Gruenther his secondincommand at NATO partly because of his skill at bridge. Saturday night bridge games at the White House were a feature of his presidency. He was a strong player, though not an expert by modern standards. The great bridge player and popularizer Ely Culbertson described his game as classic and sound with flashes of brilliance, and said that You can always judge a mans character by the way he plays cards. Eisenhower is a calm and collected player and never whines at his losses. He is brilliant in victory but never commits the bridge players worst crime of gloating when he wins. Bridge expert Oswald Jacoby frequently participated in the White House games, and said, The President plays better bridge than golf. He tries to break 90 at golf. At bridge, you would say he plays in the 70s. World War I After graduation in 1915, Second Lieutenant Eisenhower requested an assignment in the Philippines, which was denied. He served initially in logistics and then the infantry at various camps in Texas and Georgia until 1918. In 1916, while stationed at Fort Sam Houston, Eisenhower was football coach for St. Louis College, now St. Marys University.Ambrose , p.56. Eisenhower was an honorary member of the Sigma Beta Chi fraternity at St. Marys University. In late 1917, while in charge of training at Ft. Oglethorpe in Georgia, his wife Mamie had their first son. When the U.S. entered World War I, he immediately requested an overseas assignment but was again denied and then assigned to Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas. In February 1918, he was transferred to Camp Meade in Maryland with the 65th Engineers. His unit was later ordered to France, but to his chagrin he received orders for the new tank corps, where he was promoted to brevet lieutenant colonel in the National Army.Ambrose , p.62. He commanded a unit that trained tank crews at Camp Colt his first command at the site of Picketts Charge on the Gettysburg, Pennsylvania Civil War battleground. Though Eisenhower and his tank crews never saw combat, he displayed excellent organizational skills, as well as an ability to accurately assess junior officers strengths and make optimal placements of personnel. Once again his spirits were raised when the unit under his command received orders overseas to France. This time his wishes were thwarted when the armistice was signed a week before his departure date. Completely missing out on the warfront left him depressed and bitter for a time, despite receiving the Distinguished Service Medal for his work at home. In World War II, rivals who had combat service in the first great war sought to denigrate Eisenhower for his previous lack of combat duty, despite his stateside experience establishing a camp, completely equipped, for thousands of troops, and developing a full combat training schedule. In service of generals Eisenhower with three unidentified men in 1919, four years after graduating from West Point After the war, Eisenhower reverted to his regular rank of captain and a few days later was promoted to major, a rank he held for 16 years. The major was assigned in 1919 to a transcontinental Army convoy to test vehicles and dramatize the need for improved roads in the nation. Indeed, the convoy averaged only 5mph from Washington, D.C., to San Francisco later the improvement of highways became a signature issue for Eisenhower as President. He assumed duties again at Camp Meade, Maryland, commanding a battalion of tanks, where he remained until 1922. His schooling continued, focused on the nature of the next war and the role of the tank in it. His new expertise in tank warfare was strengthened by a close collaboration with George S. Patton, Sereno E. Brett, and other senior tank leaders. Their leadingedge ideas of speedoriented offensive tank warfare were strongly discouraged by superiors, who considered the new approach too radical and preferred to continue using tanks in a strictly supportive role for the infantry. Eisenhower was even threatened with courtmartial for continued publication of these proposed methods of tank deployment, and he relented. From 1920, Eisenhower served under a succession of talented generals Fox Conner, John J. Pershing, Douglas MacArthur and George Marshall. He first became executive officer to General Conner in the Panama Canal Zone, where, joined by Mamie, he served until 1924. Under Conners tutelage, he studied military history and theory , and later cited Conners enormous influence on his military thinking, saying in 1962 that Fox Conner was the ablest man I ever knew. Conners comment on Eisenhower was, He is one of the most capable, efficient and loyal officers I have ever met. On Conners recommendation, in 1925 26 he attended the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, where he graduated first in a class of 245 officers.American President An Online Reference Resource, Dwight David Eisenhower , Life Before the Presidency, Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. He then served as a battalion commander at Fort Benning, Georgia, until 1927. During the late 1920s and early 1930s, Eisenhowers career in the postwar army stalled somewhat, as military priorities diminished many of his friends resigned for highpaying business jobs. He was assigned to the American Battle Monuments Commission directed by General Pershing, and with the help of his brother Milton Eisenhower, then a journalist at the Agriculture Department, he produced a guide to American battlefields in Europe. He then was assigned to the Army War College and graduated in 1928. After a oneyear assignment in France, Eisenhower served as executive officer to General George V. Mosely, Assistant Secretary of War, from 1929 to February 1933. Major Dwight D. Eisenhower graduated from the Army Industrial College in 1933 and later served on the faculty . His primary duty was planning for the next war, which proved most difficult in the midst of the Great Depression. He then was posted as chief military aide to General MacArthur, Army Chief of Staff. In 1932, he participated in the clearing of the Bonus March encampment in Washington, D.C. Although he was against the actions taken against the veterans and strongly advised MacArthur against taking a public role in it, he later wrote the Armys official incident report, endorsing MacArthurs conduct. In 1935, he accompanied MacArthur to the Philippines, where he served as assistant military adviser to the Philippine government in developing their army. Eisenhower had strong philosophical disagreements with his patron regarding the role of the Philippine Army and the leadership qualities that an American army officer should exhibit and develop in his subordinates. The dispute and resulting antipathy between Eisenhower and MacArthur lasted the rest of their lives.Irish, Kerry. Dwight Eisenhower and Douglas MacArthur in the Philippines There Must Be a Day of Reckoning, Journal of Military History , April 2010, Vol. 74, Issue 2, pp. 439 73. Historians have concluded that this assignment provided valuable preparation for handling the challenging personalities of Winston Churchill, George S. Patton, George Marshall, and General Montgomery during World War II. Eisenhower later emphasized that too much had been made of the disagreements with MacArthur, and that a positive relationship endured. While in Manila, Mamie suffered a lifethreatening stomach ailment but recovered fully. Eisenhower was promoted to the rank of permanent lieutenant colonel in 1936. He also learned to fly, making a solo flight over the Philippines in 1937 and obtained his private pilots license in 1939 at Fort Lewis. Also around this time, he was offered a post by the Philippine Commonwealth Government, namely by then Philippine President Manuel L. Quezon on recommendations by MacArthur, to become the chief of police of a new capital being planned, now named Quezon City, but he declined the offer. Eisenhower returned to the United States in December 1939 and was assigned as commanding officer of the 1st Battalion, 15th Infantry Regiment at Fort Lewis, Washington, later becoming the regimental executive officer. In March 1941 he was promoted to colonel and assigned as chief of staff of the newly activated IX Corps under Major General Kenyon Joyce. In June 1941, he was appointed chief of staff to General Walter Krueger, Commander of the Third Army, at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas. After successfully participating in the Louisiana Maneuvers, he was promoted to brigadier general on October 3, 1941.Korda , pp239 243 Although his administrative abilities had been noticed, on the eve of the American entry into World War II he had never held an active command above a battalion and was far from being considered by many as a potential commander of major operations. World War II After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Eisenhower was assigned to the General Staff in Washington, where he served until June 1942 with responsibility for creating the major war plans to defeat Japan and Germany. He was appointed Deputy Chief in charge of Pacific Defenses under the Chief of War Plans Division , General Leonard T. Gerow, and then succeeded Gerow as Chief of the War Plans Division. Next, he was appointed Assistant Chief of Staff in charge of the new Operations Division under Chief of Staff General George C. Marshall, who spotted talent and promoted accordingly. At the end of May 1942, Eisenhower accompanied Lt. Gen. Henry H. Arnold, commanding general of the Army Air Forces, to London to assess the effectiveness of the theater commander in England, Maj. Gen. James E. Chaney. He returned to Washington on June 3 with a pessimistic assessment, stating he had an uneasy feeling about Chaney and his staff. On June 23, 1942, he returned to London as Commanding General, European Theater of Operations , based in London and with a house on Coombe, Kingston upon Thames,Eisenhower lived in Telegraph Cottage, Warren Road, Coombe, Kingston upon Thames from 1942 to 1944. In 1995, a plaque commemorating this was placed there by the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames. It can be seen at the north end of Warren Road. and took over command of ETOUSA from Chaney. He was promoted to lieutenant general on July 7. Operations Torch and Avalanche Eisenhower as a major general, 1942 Eisenhower as General of the Army, 1945 In November 1942, he was also appointed Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force of the North African Theater of Operations through the new operational Headquarters Allied Force Headquarters FHQ. The word expeditionary was dropped soon after his appointment for security reasons. The campaign in North Africa was designated Operation Torch and was planned underground within the Rock of Gibraltar. Eisenhower was the first nonBritish person to command Gibraltar in 200 years. French cooperation was deemed necessary to the campaign, and Eisenhower encountered a preposterous situation with the multiple rival factions in France. His primary objective was to move forces successfully into Tunisia, and intending to facilitate that objective, he gave his support to Franois Darlan as High Commissioner in North Africa, despite Darlans previous high offices of state in Vichy France and his continued role as commanderinchief of the French armed forces. The Allied leaders were thunderstruck by this from a political standpoint, though none of them had offered Eisenhower guidance with the problem in the course of planning the operation. Eisenhower was severely criticized for the move. Darlan was assassinated on December 24 by Fernand Bonnier de La Chapelle. Eisenhower did not take action to prevent the arrest and extrajudicial execution of Bonnier de La Chapelle by associates of Darlan acting without authority from either Vichy or the Allies, considering it a criminal rather than a military matter.Atkinson, An Army at Dawn , pp. 251 2. Eisenhower later appointed General Henri Giraud as High Commissioner, who had been installed by the Allies as Darlans commanderinchief, and who had refused to postpone the execution. Operation Torch also served as a valuable training ground for Eisenhowers combat command skills during the initial phase of Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommels move into the Kasserine Pass, Eisenhower created some confusion in the ranks by some interference with the execution of battle plans by his subordinates. He also was initially indecisive in his removal of Lloyd Fredendall, commanding U.S. II Corps. He became more adroit in such matters in later campaigns.Ambrose , pp.230 3. In February 1943, his authority was extended as commander of AFHQ across the Mediterranean basin to include the British Eighth Army, commanded by General Sir Bernard Montgomery. The Eighth Army had advanced across the Western Desert from the east and was ready for the start of the Tunisia Campaign. Eisenhower gained his fourth star and gave up command of ETOUSA to become commander of NATOUSA. General Eisenhower, General Patton and President Roosevelt in Sicily, 1943 After the capitulation of Axis forces in North Africa, Eisenhower oversaw the highly successful invasion of Sicily. Once Mussolini, the Italian leader, had fallen in Italy, the Allies switched their attention to the mainland with Operation Avalanche. But while Eisenhower argued with President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, who both insisted on unconditional terms of surrender in exchange for helping the Italians, the Germans pursued an aggressive buildup of forces in the country. The Germans made the already tough battle more difficult by adding 19 divisions and initially outnumbering the Allied forces 2 to 1 nevertheless, the invasion of Italy was highly successful for the Allied commanders. Supreme Allied commander and Operation Overlord Eisenhower speaks with men of the 502nd Parachute Infantry Regiment, part of the 101st Airborne Division, on June 5, 1944, the day before the DDay invasion. In December 1943, President Roosevelt decided that Eisenhower not Marshall would be Supreme Allied Commander in Europe. The following month, he resumed command of ETOUSA and the following month was officially designated as the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force , serving in a dual role until the end of hostilities in Europe in May 1945. He was charged in these positions with planning and carrying out the Allied assault on the coast of Normandy in June 1944 under the code name Operation Overlord, the liberation of Western Europe and the invasion of Germany. From left, front row includes army officers Simpson, Patton, Spaatz, Eisenhower, Bradley, Hodges and Gerow in 1945 Eisenhower, as well as the officers and troops under him, had learned valuable lessons in their previous operations, and their skills had all strengthened in preparation for the next most difficult campaign against the Germans a beach landing assault. His first struggles, however, were with Allied leaders and officers on matters vital to the success of the Normandy invasion he argued with Roosevelt over an essential agreement with De Gaulle to use French resistance forces in covert and sabotage operations against the Germans in advance of Overlord. Admiral Ernest J. King fought with Eisenhower over Kings refusal to provide additional landing craft from the Pacific. He also insisted that the British give him exclusive command over all strategic air forces to facilitate Overlord, to the point of threatening to resign unless Churchill relented, as he did. Eisenhower then designed a bombing plan in France in advance of Overlord and argued with Churchill over the latters concern with civilian casualties de Gaulle interjected that the casualties were justified in shedding the yoke of the Germans, and Eisenhower prevailed. He also had to skillfully manage to retain the services of the often unruly George S. Patton, by severely reprimanding him when Patton earlier had slapped a subordinate, and then when Patton gave a speech in which he made improper comments about postwar policy. The DDay Normandy landings on June 6, 1944, were costly but successful. Two months later , the invasion of Southern France took place, and control of forces in the southern invasion passed from the AFHQ to the SHAEF. Many thought that victory in Europe would come by summers end, but the Germans did not capitulate for almost a year. From then until the end of the war in Europe on May 8, 1945, Eisenhower, through SHAEF, commanded all Allied forces, and through his command of ETOUSA had administrative command of all U.S. forces on the Western Front north of the Alps. He was ever mindful of the inevitable loss of life and suffering that would be experienced on an individual level by the troops under his command and their families. This prompted him to make a point of visiting every division involved in the invasion. Eisenhowers sense of responsibility was underscored by his draft of a statement to be issued if the invasion failed. It has been called one of the great speeches of history Our landings in the CherbourgHavre area have failed to gain a satisfactory foothold and I have withdrawn the troops. My decision to attack at this time and place was based on the best information available. The troops, the air and the Navy did all that bravery and devotion to duty could do. If any blame or fault attaches to the attempt, it is mine alone.William Safire, Lend me your ears great speeches in history p. 1143 Liberation of France and victory in Europe Eisenhower with Allied commanders following the signing of the German Instrument of Surrender at Reims Once the coastal assault had succeeded, Eisenhower insisted on retaining personal control over the land battle strategy, and was immersed in the command and supply of multiple assaults through France on Germany. Field Marshal Montgomery insisted priority be given to his 21st Army Groups attack being made in the north, while Generals Bradley and Devers insisted they be given priority in the center and south of the front . Eisenhower worked tirelessly to address the demands of the rival commanders to optimize Allied forces, often by giving them tactical, though sometimes ineffective, latitude many historians conclude this delayed the Allied victory in Europe. However, due to Eisenhowers persistence, the pivotal supply port at Antwerp was successfully, albeit belatedly, opened in late 1944, and victory became a more distinct probability. In recognition of his senior position in the Allied command, on December 20, 1944, he was promoted to General of the Army, equivalent to the rank of Field Marshal in most European armies. In this and the previous high commands he held, Eisenhower showed his great talents for leadership and diplomacy. Although he had never seen action himself, he won the respect of frontline commanders. He interacted adeptly with allies such as Winston Churchill, Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery and General Charles de Gaulle. He had serious disagreements with Churchill and Montgomery over questions of strategy, but these rarely upset his relationships with them. He dealt with Soviet Marshal Zhukov, his Russian counterpart, and they became good friends.Jean Edward Smith, Eisenhower in War and Peace p. 451. The Germans launched a surprise counter offensive, in the Battle of the Bulge in December 1944, which the Allies turned back in early 1945 after Eisenhower repositioned his armies and improved weather allowed the Air Force to engage. German defenses continued to deteriorate on both the eastern front with the Soviets and the western front with the Allies. The British wanted Berlin, but Eisenhower decided it would be a military mistake for him to attack Berlin, and said orders to that effect would have to be explicit. The British backed down, but then wanted Eisenhower to move into Czechoslovakia for political reasons. Washington refused to support Churchills plan to use Eisenhowers army for political maneuvers against Moscow. The actual division of Germany followed the lines that Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin had previously agreed upon. The Soviet Red Army captured Berlin in a very largescale bloody battle, and the Germans finally surrendered on May 7, 1945. In 1945, Eisenhower anticipated that someday an attempt would be made to recharacterize Nazi crimes as propaganda and took steps against it by demanding extensive still and movie photographic documentation of Nazi death camps. After World War II Military Governor in Germany and Army Chief of Staff The sphere of influence for General Eisenhower in Alliedoccupied Germany Following the German unconditional surrender, Eisenhower was appointed Military Governor of the U.S. Occupation Zone, based at the IG Farben Building in Frankfurt am Main. He had no responsibility for the other three zones, controlled by Britain, France and the Soviet Union, except for the city of Berlin, which was managed by the FourPower Authorities through the Allied Kommandatura as the governing body. Upon discovery of the Nazi concentration camps, he ordered camera crews to document evidence of the atrocities in them for use in the Nuremberg Trials. He reclassified German prisoners of war in U.S. custody as Disarmed Enemy Forces , who were no longer subject to the Geneva Convention. Eisenhower followed the orders laid down by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in directive JCS 1067, but softened them by bringing in 400,000 tons of food for civilians and allowing more fraternization.Zink, Harold . American Military Government in Germany , pp. 39 86Goedde, Petra. From Villains to Victims Fraternization and the Feminization of Germany, 1945 1947, Diplomatic History , Winter 1999, Vol. 23, Issue 1, pp. 1 19Tent, James F. , Mission on the Rhine Reeducation and Denazification in AmericanOccupied Germany In response to the devastation in Germany, including food shortages and an influx of refugees, he arranged distribution of American food and medical equipment.Zink, Harold . The United States in Germany, 1944 1955 His actions reflected the new American attitudes of the German people as Nazi victims not villains, while aggressively purging the exNazis.Ambrose . Eisenhower , pp. 421 5Goedde, Petra . GIs and Germans Culture, Gender and Foreign Relations, 1945 1949 In Warsaw, 1945 In November 1945, Eisenhower returned to Washington to replace Marshall as Chief of Staff of the Army. His main role was rapid demobilization of millions of soldiers, a slow job that was delayed by lack of shipping. Eisenhower was convinced in 1946 that the Soviet Union did not want war and that friendly relations could be maintained he strongly supported the new United Nations and favored its involvement in the control of atomic bombs. However, in formulating policies regarding the atomic bomb and relations with the Soviets, Truman was guided by the U.S. State Department and ignored Eisenhower and the Pentagon. Indeed, Eisenhower had opposed the use of the atomic bomb against the Japanese, writing, First, the Japanese were ready to surrender and it wasnt necessary to hit them with that awful thing. Second, I hated to see our country be the first to use such a weapon.Richard Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, with Rhodes citing a 1963 profile called Ike on Ike, in Newsweek November 11, 1963 Initially, Eisenhower was characterized by hopes for cooperation with the Soviets. He even visited Warsaw in 1945. Invited by BolesBaw Bierut and decorated with the highest military decoration, he was shocked by the scale of destruction in the city. However, by mid1947, as East West tensions over economic recovery in Germany and the Greek Civil War escalated, Eisenhower gave up and agreed with a containment policy to stop Soviet expansion. 1948 presidential election In June 1943, a visiting politician had suggested to Eisenhower that he might become President of the United States after the war. Believing that a general should not participate in politics, one author later wrote that figuratively speaking, Eisenhower kicked his politicalminded visitor out of his office. As others asked him about his political future, Eisenhower told one that he could not imagine wanting to be considered for any political job from dogcatcher to Grand High Supreme King of the Universe, and another that he could not serve as Army Chief of Staff if others believed he had political ambitions. In 1945 Truman told Eisenhower during the Potsdam Conference that if desired, the president would help the general win the 1948 election, and in 1947 he offered to run as Eisenhowers running mate on the Democratic ticket if MacArthur won the Republican nomination.Truman Wrote of 48 Offer to Eisenhower The New York Times , July 11, 2003. As the election approached, other prominent citizens and politicians from both parties urged Eisenhower to run for president. In January 1948, after learning of plans in New Hampshire to elect delegates supporting him for the forthcoming Republican National Convention, Eisenhower stated through the Army that he was not available for and could not accept nomination to high political office lifelong professional soldiers, he wrote, in the absence of some obvious and overriding reason, should abstain from seeking high political office. Eisenhower maintained no political party affiliation during this time. Many believed he was forgoing his only opportunity to be president Republican Thomas E. Dewey was considered the probable winner and would presumably serve two terms, meaning that Eisenhower, at age 66 in 1956, would be too old to have another chance to run. President at Columbia University and NATO Supreme Commander The Supreme Commanders of the Four Powers on June 5, 1945, in Berlin Bernard Montgomery, Dwight D. Eisenhower, Georgy Zhukov and Jean de Lattre de Tassigny In 1948, Eisenhower became President of Columbia University, an Ivy League university in New York City, where he was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa. The assignment was described as not being a good fit in either direction.Ambrose . Eisenhower , ch. 24 During that year Eisenhowers memoir, Crusade in Europe , was published. Crusade in Europe , Doubleday 1st edition , 559 pages, Critics regarded it as one of the finest U.S. military memoirs, and it was a major financial success as well. Eisenhowers profit on the book was substantially aided by an unprecedented ruling by the U.S. Department of the Treasury that Eisenhower was not a professional writer, but rather, marketing the lifetime asset of his experiences, and thus he had to pay only capital gains tax on his 635,000 advance instead of the much higher personal tax rate. This ruling saved Eisenhower about 400,000.Pietrusza, David, 1948 Harry Trumans Victory and the Year That Transformed America, Union Square Punlishing, 2011, p. 201 Eisenhowers stint as the president of Columbia University was punctuated by his activity within the Council on Foreign Relations, a study group he led as president concerning the political and military implications of the Marshall Plan, and The American Assembly, Eisenhowers vision of a great cultural center where business, professional and governmental leaders could meet from time to time to discuss and reach conclusions concerning problems of a social and political nature. His biographer Blanche Wiesen Cook suggested that this period served as the political education of General Eisenhower, since he had to prioritize wideranging educational, administrative, and financial demands for the university. Through his involvement in the Council on Foreign Relations, he also gained exposure to economic analysis, which would become the bedrock of his understanding in economic policy. Whatever General Eisenhower knows about economics, he has learned at the study group meetings, one Aid to Europe member claimed. Eisenhower accepted the presidency of the university to expand his ability to promote the American form of democracy through education. He was clear on this point to the trustees involved in the search committee. He informed them that his main purpose was to promote the basic concepts of education in a democracy. As a result, he was almost incessantly devoted to the idea of the American Assembly, a concept he developed into an institution by the end of 1950. Within months of beginning his tenure as the president of the university, Eisenhower was requested to advise U.S. Secretary of Defense James Forrestal on the unification of the armed services. About six months after his appointment, he became the informal Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington. Two months later he fell ill, and he spent over a month in recovery at the Augusta National Golf Club. He returned to his post in New York in midMay, and in July 1949 took a twomonth vacation outofstate. Because the American Assembly had begun to take shape, he traveled around the country during midtolate 1950, building financial support from Columbia Associates, an alumni association. Eisenhower was unknowingly building resentment and a reputation among the Columbia University faculty and staff as an absentee president who was using the university for his own interests. As a career military man, he naturally had little in common with the academics. The contacts gained through university and American Assembly fundraising activities would later become important supporters in Eisenhowers bid for the Republican party nomination and the presidency. Meanwhile, Columbia Universitys liberal faculty members became disenchanted with the university presidents ties to oilmen and businessmen, including Leonard McCollum, the president of Continental Oil Frank Abrams, the chairman of Standard Oil of New Jersey Bob Kleberg, the president of the King Ranch H. J. Porter, a Texas oil executive Bob Woodruff, the president of the CocaCola Corporation and Clarence Francis, the chairman of General Foods. As the president of Columbia, Eisenhower gave voice and form to his opinions about the supremacy and difficulties of American democracy. His tenure marked his transformation from military to civilian leadership. His biographer Travis Beal Jacobs also suggested that the alienation of the Columbia faculty contributed to sharp intellectual criticism of him for many years.Warshaw, Shirley Anne . Reexamining the Eisenhower presidency , Greenwood Press, The trustees of Columbia University refused to accept Eisenhowers resignation in December 1950, when he took an extended leave from the university to become the Supreme Commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , and he was given operational command of NATO forces in Europe. Eisenhower retired from active service as an army general on May 31, 1952, and he resumed his presidency of Columbia. He held this position until January 20, 1953, when he became the President of the United States. NATO did not have strong bipartisan support in Congress at the time that Eisenhower assumed its military command. Eisenhower advised the participating European nations that it would be incumbent upon them to demonstrate their own commitment of troops and equipment to the NATO force before such would come from the warweary United States. At home, Eisenhower was more effective in making the case for NATO in Congress than the Truman administration was. By the middle of 1951, American and European support for NATO was substantial enough to give it a genuine military power. Nevertheless, Eisenhower thought that NATO would become a truly European alliance, with the American and Canadian commitments ending after about ten years. Presidential campaign of 1952 Button from the 1952 campaign President Truman, symbolizing a broadbased desire for an Eisenhower candidacy for president, again in 1951 pressed him to run for the office as a Democrat. It was at this time that Eisenhower voiced his disagreements with the Democratic party and declared himself and his family to be Republicans. A Draft Eisenhower movement in the Republican Party persuaded him to declare his candidacy in the 1952 presidential election to counter the candidacy of noninterventionist Senator Robert A. Taft. The effort was a long struggle Eisenhower had to be convinced that political circumstances had created a genuine duty for him to offer himself as a candidate, and that there was a mandate from the populace for him to be their President. Henry Cabot Lodge, who served as his campaign manager, and others succeeded in convincing him, and in June 1952 he resigned his command at NATO to campaign fulltime. Eisenhower defeated Taft for the nomination, having won critical delegate votes from Texas. Eisenhowers campaign was noted for the simple but effective slogan, I Like Ike. It was essential to his success that Eisenhower express opposition to Roosevelts policy at Yalta and against Trumans policies in Korea and China matters in which he had once participated. In defeating Taft for the nomination, it became necessary for Eisenhower to appease the right wing Old Guard of the Republican Party his selection of Richard M. Nixon as the VicePresident on the ticket was designed in part for that purpose. Nixon also provided a strong anticommunist presence as well as some youth to counter Ikes more advanced age. 1952 electoral vote results In the general election, against the advice of his advisors, Eisenhower insisted on campaigning in the South, refusing to surrender the region to the Democratic Party. The campaign strategy, dubbed K1C2, was to focus on attacking the Truman and Roosevelt administrations on three issues Korea, Communism and corruption. In an effort to accommodate the right, he stressed that the liberation of Eastern Europe should be by peaceful means only he also distanced himself from his former boss President Truman. Two controversies during the campaign tested him and his staff, but did not affect the campaign. One involved a report that Nixon had improperly received funds from a secret trust. Nixon spoke out adroitly to avoid potential damage, but the matter permanently alienated the two candidates. The second issue centered on Eisenhowers relented decision to confront the controversial methods of Joseph McCarthy on his home turf in a Wisconsin appearance.Ambrose . Eisenhower , pp. 556 67. Just two weeks prior to the election, Eisenhower vowed to go to Korea and end the war there. He promised to maintain a strong commitment against Communism while avoiding the topic of NATO finally, he stressed a corruptionfree, frugal administration at home. He defeated Democratic candidate Adlai Stevenson II in a landslide, with an electoral margin of 442 to 89, marking the first Republican return to the White House in 20 years. In the election he also brought with him a Republican majority in the House and in the Senate . Eisenhower was the last president born in the 19th century, and at age 62, was the oldest man elected President since James Buchanan in 1856 . Eisenhower was the only general to serve as President in the 20th century and was the most recent President to have never held elected office prior to the Presidency until Donald Trump, who never held public office nor served in the military the other Presidents who did not have prior elected office were Zachary Taylor, Ulysses S. Grant, William Howard Taft, and Herbert Hoover. Election of 1956 1956 electoral vote results The United States presidential election of 1956 was held on November 6, 1956. Eisenhower, the popular incumbent, successfully ran for reelection. The election was a rematch of 1952, as his opponent in 1956 was Stevenson, a former Illinois governor, whom Eisenhower had defeated four years earlier. Compared to the 1952 election, Eisenhower gained Kentucky, Louisiana, and West Virginia from Stevenson, while losing Missouri. His voters were less likely to bring up his leadership record. Instead what stood out this time, was the response to personal qualities to his sincerity, his integrity and sense of duty, his virtue as a family man, his religious devotion, and his sheer likeableness. Presidency Due to a complete estrangement between the two as a result of campaigning, Truman and Eisenhower had minimal discussions about the transition of administrations. After selecting his budget director, Joseph M. Dodge, Eisenhower asked Herbert Brownell Jr. and Lucius D. Clay to make recommendations for his cabinet appointments. He accepted their recommendations without exception they included John Foster Dulles and George M. Humphrey with whom he developed his closest relationships, and one woman, Oveta Culp Hobby. Eisenhowers cabinet, consisting of several corporate executives and one labor leader, was dubbed by one journalist, Eight millionaires and a plumber. The cabinet was known for its lack of personal friends, office seekers, or experienced government administrators. He also upgraded the role of the National Security Council in planning all phases of the Cold War. Prior to his inauguration, Eisenhower led a meeting of advisors at Pearl Harbor addressing foremost issues agreed objectives were to balance the budget during his term, to bring the Korean War to an end, to defend vital interests at lower cost through nuclear deterrent, and to end price and wage controls. Eisenhower also conducted the first preinaugural cabinet meeting in history in late 1952 he used this meeting to articulate his anticommunist Russia policy. His inaugural address, as well, was exclusively devoted to foreign policy and included this same philosophy, as well as a commitment to foreign trade and the United Nations. February 1959 White House Portrait Eisenhower made greater use of press conferences than any previous president, holding almost 200 over his two terms. While he saw the benefit of maintaining a good relationship with the press, he saw more value in them as a means of direct communication with the American people. Throughout his presidency, Eisenhower adhered to a political philosophy of dynamic conservatism. A selfdescribed progressive conservative who used terms like progressive moderate and dynamic conservatism to describe his approach, he continued all the major New Deal programs still in operation, especially Social Security. He expanded its programs and rolled them into a new cabinetlevel agency, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, while extending benefits to an additional ten million workers. He implemented integration in the Armed Services in two years, which had not been completed under Truman. When the 1954 Congressional elections approached, it became evident that the Republicans were in danger of losing their thin majority in both houses. Eisenhower was among those who blamed the Old Guard for the losses, and he took up the charge to stop suspected efforts by the right wing to take control of the GOP. Eisenhower then articulated his position as a moderate, progressive Republican I have just one purpose... and that is to build up a strong progressive Republican Party in this country. If the right wing wants a fight, they are going to get it... before I end up, either this Republican Party will reflect progressivism or I wont be with them anymore. Eisenhower initially planned on serving only one term, but as with other decisions, he maintained a position of maximum flexibility in case leading Republicans wanted him to run again. During his recovery from a heart attack late in 1955, he huddled with his closest advisors to evaluate the GOPs potential candidates the group, in addition to his doctor, concluded a second term was well advised, and he announced in February 1956 he would run again. Eisenhower was publicly noncommittal about Nixons repeating as the Vice President on his ticket the question was an especially important one in light of his heart condition. He personally favored Robert B. Anderson, a Democrat, who rejected his offer Eisenhower then resolved to leave the matter in the hands of the party. In 1956, Eisenhower faced Adlai Stevenson again and won by an even larger landslide, with 457 of 531 electoral votes and 57.6 of the popular vote. The level of campaigning was curtailed out of health considerations. Eisenhower valued the brief respites and the amenities of an office which he endowed with an arduous daily schedule. He made full use of his valet, chauffeur, and secretarial support he rarely drove or dialed a phone number. He was an avid fisherman, golfer, painter, and bridge player, and preferred active rather than passive forms of entertainment. On August 26, 1959, Eisenhower was aboard the maiden flight of Air Force One, which replaced the previous Presidential aircraft, the Columbine . Interstate Highway System Eisenhower was assured of an enduring achievement when he championied and signed the bill that authorized the Interstate Highway System in 1956. He justified the project through the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 as essential to American security during the Cold War. It was believed that large cities would be targets in a possible war, hence the highways were designed to facilitate their evacuation and ease military maneuvers. Eisenhowers goal to create improved highways was influenced by difficulties encountered during his involvement in the U.S. Armys 1919 Transcontinental Motor Convoy. He was assigned as an observer for the mission, which involved sending a convoy of U.S. Army vehicles coast to coast. His subsequent experience with encountering German autobahn limitedaccess road systems during the concluding stages of World War II convinced him of the benefits of an Interstate Highway System. Noticing the improved ability to move logistics throughout the country, he thought an Interstate Highway System in the U.S. would not only be beneficial for military operations, but provide a measure of continued economic growth. The legislation initially stalled in the Congress over the issuance of bonds to finance the project, but the legislative effort was renewed and the law was signed by Eisenhower in June 1956. Foreign policy Eisenhower with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru U.S. President Eisenhower visits Taiwan and its President Chiang Kaishek at Taipei. In 1953, the Republican Partys Old Guard presented Eisenhower with a dilemma by insisting he disavow the Yalta Agreements as beyond the constitutional authority of the Executive Branch however, the death of Joseph Stalin in March 1953 made the matter a moot point. At this time Eisenhower gave his Chance for Peace speech in which he attempted, unsuccessfully, to forestall the nuclear arms race with the Soviet Union by suggesting multiple opportunities presented by peaceful uses of nuclear materials. Biographer Stephen Ambrose opined that this was the best speech of Eisenhowers presidency.Eisenhower, Susan, 50 years later, were still ignoring Ikes warning, The Washington Post , January 16, 2011, p. B3. Nevertheless, the Cold War escalated during his presidency. When the Soviet Union successfully tested a hydrogen bomb in late November 1955, Eisenhower, against the advice of Dulles, decided to initiate a disarmament proposal to the Soviets. In an attempt to make their refusal more difficult, he proposed that both sides agree to dedicate fissionable material away from weapons toward peaceful uses, such as power generation. This approach was labeled Atoms for Peace. The U.N. speech was well received but the Soviets never acted upon it, due to an overarching concern for the greater stockpiles of nuclear weapons in the U.S. arsenal. Indeed, Eisenhower embarked upon a greater reliance on the use of nuclear weapons, while reducing conventional forces, and with them the overall defense budget, a policy formulated as a result of Project Solarium and expressed in NSC 1622. This approach became known as the New Look, and was initiated with defense cuts in late 1953. In 1955 American nuclear arms policy became one aimed primarily at arms control as opposed to disarmament. The failure of negotiations over arms until 1955 was due mainly to the refusal of the Russians to permit any sort of inspections. In talks located in London that year, they expressed a willingness to discuss inspections the tables were then turned on Eisenhower, when he responded with an unwillingness on the part of the U.S. to permit inspections. In May of that year the Russians agreed to sign a treaty giving independence to Austria, and paved the way for a Geneva summit with the U.S., U.K. and France. At the Geneva Conference Eisenhower presented a proposal called Open Skies to facilitate disarmament, which included plans for Russia and the U.S. to provide mutual access to each others skies for open surveillance of military infrastructure. Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev dismissed the proposal out of hand. In 1954, Eisenhower articulated the domino theory in his outlook towards communism in Southeast Asia and also in Central America. He believed that if the communists were allowed to prevail in Vietnam, this would cause a succession of countries to fall to communism, from Laos through Malaysia and Indonesia ultimately to India. Likewise, the fall of Guatemala would end with the fall of neighboring Mexico. That year the loss of North Vietnam to the communists and the rejection of his proposed European Defence Community were serious defeats, but he remained optimistic in his opposition to the spread of communism, saying Long faces dont win wars. As he had threatened the French in their rejection of EDC, he afterwards moved to restore West Germany, as a full NATO partner. With Eisenhowers leadership and Dulles direction, CIA activities increased under the pretense of resisting the spread of communism in poorer countries the CIA in part deposed the leaders of Iran in Operation Ajax, of Guatemala through Operation Pbsuccess, and possibly the newly independent Republic of the Congo . In 1954 Eisenhower wanted to increase surveillance inside the Soviet Union. With Dulles recommendation, he authorized the deployment of thirty Lockheed U2s at a cost of 35 million. The Eisenhower administration also planned the Bay of Pigs Invasion to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba, which John F. Kennedy was left to carry out.Greenberg, David Beware the military industrial Complex, Slate Space Race Eisenhower and the CIA had known since at least January 1957, nine months before Sputnik, that Russia had the capability to launch a small payload into orbit and was likely to do so within a year.John M. Logsdon, Exploring the Unknown Selected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program He may also privately have welcomed the Russian satellite for its legal implications By launching a satellite, Russia had in effect acknowledged that space was open to anyone who could access it, without needing permission from other nations. On the whole, Eisenhowers support of the nations fledgling space program was officially modest until the Soviet launch of Sputnik in 1957, gaining the Cold War enemy enormous prestige around the world. He then launched a national campaign that funded not just space exploration but a major strengthening of science and higher education. The Eisenhower administration determined to adopt a nonaggressive policy that would allow spacecrafts of any state to overfly all states, a region free of military posturing and launch Earth satellites to explore space.Logsdon, John M, and Lear, Linda J. Exploring the UnknownSelected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program Washington D.C. His Open Skies Policy attempted to legitimize illegal Lockheed U2 flyovers and Project Genetrix while paving the way for spy satellite technology to orbit over sovereign territory,W.D. Kay, Defining NASA The Historical Debate Over the Agencys Mission, 2005. however Nikolai Bulganin and Nikita Khrushchev declined Eisenhowers proposal at the Geneva conference in July 1955.Parmet, Herbert S. Eisenhower and the American Crusades Fear spread through the United States that the Soviet Union would invade and spread communism, so Eisenhower wanted to not only create a surveillance satellite to detect any threats but ballistic missiles that would protect the United States. In strategic terms, it was Eisenhower who devised the American basic strategy of nuclear deterrence based upon the triad of B52 bombers, landbased intercontinental ballistic missiles , and Polaris submarinelaunched ballistic missiles .Peter J. Roman, Eisenhower and the Missile Gap NASA planners projected that human spaceflight would pull the United States ahead in the Space Race as well as accomplishing their long time goal, however, in 1960, an Ad Hoc Panel on ManinSpace concluded that maninspace can not be justified and was too costly.The Presidentss Science Advisory Committee, Report od the Ad Hoc Panel on ManinSpace December 16, 1960. NASA Historical Collection Eisenhower later resented the space program and its gargantuan price tag he was quoted as saying, Anyone who would spend 40 billion in a race to the moon for national prestige is nuts.Greg Ward, A Rough Guide History of the USA Korean War, China, and Taiwan Eisenhower in Korea with General Chung Ilkwon, and Baik Seonyup, 1952 In late 1952 Eisenhower went to Korea and discovered a military and political stalemate. Once in office, when the Chinese began a buildup in the Kaesong sanctuary, he threatened to use nuclear force if an armistice was not concluded. His earlier military reputation in Europe was effective with the Chinese. The National Security Council, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Strategic Air Command devised detailed plans for nuclear war against China. With the death of Stalin in early March 1953, Russian support for a Chinese hardline weakened and China decided to compromise on the prisoner issue.Ambrose , p.106 7 In July 1953, an armistice took effect with Korea divided along approximately the same boundary as in 1950. The armistice and boundary remain in effect today. The armistice, concluded despite opposition from Secretary Dulles, South Korean President Syngman Rhee, and also within Eisenhowers party, has been described by biographer Ambrose as the greatest achievement of the administration. Eisenhower had the insight to realize that unlimited war in the nuclear age was unthinkable, and limited war unwinnable. A point of emphasis in Ikes campaign had been his endorsement of a policy of liberation from communism as opposed to a policy of containment. This remained his preference despite the armistice with Korea. Throughout his terms Eisenhower took a hardline attitude toward China, as demanded by conservative Republicans, with the goal of driving a wedge between China and the Soviet Union. Eisenhower continued Trumans policy of recognizing the Republic of China as the legitimate government of China, not the Beijing regime. There were localized flareups when the Red Army began shelling the islands of Quemoy and Matsu in September 1954. Eisenhower received recommendations embracing every variation of response to the aggression of the Chinese communists. He thought it essential to have every possible option available to him as the crisis unfolded. The SinoAmerican Mutual Defense Treaty with Taiwan was signed in December 1954. He requested and secured from Congress their Formosa Resolution in January 1955, which gave Eisenhower unprecedented power in advance to use military force at any level of his choosing in defense of Formosa and the Pescadores. The Resolution bolstered the morale of the Chinese nationalists, and signaled to Beijing that the U.S. was committed to holding the line. Eisenhower openly threatened the Chinese with use of nuclear weapons, authorizing a series of bomb tests labeled Operation Teapot. Nevertheless, he left the Chinese communists guessing as to the exact nature of his nuclear response. This allowed Eisenhower to accomplish all of his objectives the end of this communist encroachment, the retention of the Islands by the Chinese nationalists and continued peace. Defense of Taiwan from an invasion remains a core American policy. By the end of 1954 Eisenhowers military and foreign policy experts the NSC, JCS and State Dept. had unanimously urged him, on no less than five occasions, to launch an atomic attack against China yet he consistently refused to do so and felt a distinct sense of accomplishment in having sufficiently confronted communism while keeping world peace. The Middle East and Eisenhower doctrine Eisenhower with the Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi Even before he was inaugurated Eisenhower accepted a request from the British government to restore the Shah of Iran to power. He therefore authorized the Central Intelligence Agency to overthrow Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh.Eisenhower gave verbal approval to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and to Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles to proceed with the coup Ambrose, Eisenhower, Vol. 2 The President p. 111 Ambrose , Eisenhower Soldier and President , New York Simon and Schuster, p. 333 This resulted in an increased strategic control over Iranian oil by U.S. and British companies. In November 1956, Eisenhower forced an end to the combined British, French and Israeli invasion of Egypt in response to the Suez Crisis, receiving praise from Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser. Simultaneously he condemned the brutal Soviet invasion of Hungary in response to the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. He publicly disavowed his allies at the United Nations, and used financial and diplomatic pressure to make them withdraw from Egypt.Kingseed, Cole , Eisenhower and the Suez Crisis of 1956 , ch 6 Eisenhower explicitly defended his strong position against Britain and France in his memoirs, which were published in 1965.Dwight D. Eisenhower, Waging Peace 1956 1961 p 99 Eisenhower and Vice President Richard Nixon with their host, King Saud of Saudi Arabia, at the Mayflower Hotel After the Suez Crisis the United States became the protector of unstable friendly governments in the Middle East via the Eisenhower Doctrine. Designed by Secretary of State Dulles, it held the U.S. would be prepared to use armed force... counter aggression from any country controlled by international communism. Further, the United States would provide economic and military aid and, if necessary, use military force to stop the spread of communism in the Middle East.Isaac Alteras, Eisenhower and Israel U.S. Israeli Relations, 1953 1960 , p. 296 Eisenhower applied the doctrine in 1957 58 by dispensing economic aid to shore up the Kingdom of Jordan, and by encouraging Syrias neighbors to consider military operations against it. More dramatically, in July 1958, he sent 15,000 Marines and soldiers to Lebanon as part of Operation Blue Bat, a noncombat peacekeeping mission to stabilize the proWestern government and to prevent a radical revolution from sweeping over that country. The mission proved a success and the Marines departed three months later. The deployment came in response to the urgent request of Lebanese president Camille Chamoun after sectarian violence had erupted in the country. Washington considered the military intervention successful since it brought about regional stability, weakened Soviet influence, and intimidated the Egyptian and Syrian governments, whose antiWest political position had hardened after the Suez Crisis. Most Arab countries were skeptical about the Eisenhower doctrine because they considered Zionist imperialism the real danger. However, they did take the opportunity to obtain free money and weapons. Egypt and Syria, supported by the Soviet Union, openly opposed the initiative. However, Egypt received American aid until the Six Day War in 1967. As the Cold War deepened, Dulles sought to isolate the Soviet Union by building regional alliances of nations against it. Critics sometimes called it pactomania. Southeast Asia Early in 1953, the French asked Eisenhower for help in French Indochina against the Communists, supplied from China, who were fighting the First Indochina War. Eisenhower sent Lt. General John W. Iron Mike ODaniel to Vietnam to study and assess the French forces there.Dunnigan, James and Nofi, Albert , Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War . St. Martins Press, p. 85. Chief of Staff Matthew Ridgway dissuaded the President from intervening by presenting a comprehensive estimate of the massive military deployment that would be necessary. Eisenhower stated prophetically that this war would absorb our troops by divisions. Eisenhower did provide France with bombers and noncombat personnel. After a few months with no success by the French, he added other aircraft to drop napalm for clearing purposes. Further requests for assistance from the French were agreed to but only on conditions Eisenhower knew were impossible to meet allied participation and congressional approval. When the French fortress of Dien Bien Phu fell to the Vietnamese Communists in May 1954, Eisenhower refused to intervene despite urgings from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, the Vice President and the head of NCS. Eisenhower responded to the French defeat with the formation of the SEATO Alliance with the U.K., France, New Zealand and Australia in defense of Vietnam against communism. At that time the French and Chinese reconvened Geneva peace talks Eisenhower agreed the U.S. would participate only as an observer. After France and the Communists agreed to a partition of Vietnam, Eisenhower rejected the agreement, offering military and economic aid to southern Vietnam.Dunnigan, James and Nofi, Albert , Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War , p. 257 Ambrose argues that Eisenhower, by not participating in the Geneva agreement, had kept the U.S out of Vietnam nevertheless, with the formation of SEATO, he had in the end put the U.S. back into the conflict. In late 1954, Gen. J. Lawton Collins was made ambassador to Free Vietnam , effectively elevating the country to sovereign status. Collins instructions were to support the leader Ngo Dinh Diem in subverting communism, by helping him to build an army and wage a military campaign. In February 1955, Eisenhower dispatched the first American soldiers to Vietnam as military advisors to Diems army. After Diem announced the formation of the Republic of Vietnam in October, Eisenhower immediately recognized the new state and offered military, economic, and technical assistance. In the years that followed, Eisenhower increased the number of U.S. military advisors in South Vietnam to 900 men. This was due to North Vietnams support of uprisings in the south and concern the nation would fall. In May 1957 Diem, then President of South Vietnam, made a state visit to the United States for ten days. President Eisenhower pledged his continued support, and a parade was held in Diems honor in New York City. Although Diem was publicly praised, in private Secretary of State John Foster Dulles conceded that Diem had been selected because there were no better alternatives.Karnow, Stanley. , Vietnam, A History , p. 230 After the election of November 1960, Eisenhower in briefing with John F. Kennedy pointed out the communist threat in Southeast Asia as requiring prioritization in the next administration. Eisenhower told Kennedy he considered Laos the cork in the bottle with regard to the regional threat.Reeves, Richard , President Kennedy Profile of Power , p. 75 1960 U2 incident A U2 reconnaissance aircraft in flight On May 1, 1960, a U.S. oneman U2 spy plane was reportedly shot down at high altitude over Soviet Union airspace. The flight was made to gain photo intelligence before the scheduled opening of an EastWest summit conference, which had been scheduled in Paris, 15 days later. Captain Francis Gary Powers had bailed out of his aircraft and was captured after parachuting down onto Russian soil. Four days after Powers disappeared, the Eisenhower Administration had NASA issue a very detailed press release noting that an aircraft had gone missing north of Turkey. It speculated that the pilot might have fallen unconscious while the autopilot was still engaged, and falsely claimed that the pilot reported over the emergency frequency that he was experiencing oxygen difficulties. Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced that a spyplane had been shot down but intentionally made no reference to the pilot. As a result, the Eisenhower Administration, thinking the pilot had died in the crash, authorized the release of a cover story claiming that the plane was a weather research aircraft which had unintentionally strayed into Soviet airspace after the pilot had radioed difficulties with his oxygen equipment while flying over Turkey. The Soviets put Captain Powers on trial and displayed parts of the U2, which had been recovered almost fully intact.Bogle, Lori Lynn, ed. , The Cold War, Routledge, p. 104. 9780815337218 The 1960 Four Power Paris Summit with Eisenhower, Nikita Khrushchev, Harold Macmillan and Charles de Gaulle collapsed because of the incident. Eisenhower refused to accede to Khrushchevs demands that he apologize. Therefore, Khrushchev would not take part in the summit. Up until this event, Eisenhower felt he had been making progress towards better relations with the Soviet Union. Nuclear arms reduction and Berlin were to have been discussed at the summit. Eisenhower stated it had all been ruined because of that stupid U2 business. The affair was an embarrassment for United States prestige. Further, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held a lengthy inquiry into the U2 incident. In Russia, Captain Powers made a forced confession and apology. On August 19, 1960, Powers was convicted of espionage and sentenced to imprisonment. On February 10, 1962, Powers was exchanged for Rudolf Abel in Berlin and returned to the U.S. Civil rights While President Truman had begun the process of desegregating the Armed Forces in 1948, actual implementation had been slow. Eisenhower made clear his stance in his first State of the Union address in February 1953, saying I propose to use whatever authority exists in the office of the President to end segregation in the District of Columbia, including the Federal Government, and any segregation in the Armed Forces.State of the Union Address, February 2, 1953, Public Papers, 1953 pp. 30 1. When he encountered opposition from the services, he used government control of military spending to force the change through, stating Wherever Federal Funds are expended..., I do not see how any American can justify... a discrimination in the expenditure of those funds. When Robert B. Anderson, Eisenhowers first Secretary of the Navy, argued that the U.S. Navy must recognize the customs and usages prevailing in certain geographic areas of our country which the Navy had no part in creating, Eisenhower overruled him We have not taken and we shall not take a single backward step. There must be no second class citizens in this country.Byrnes to DDE, August 27, 1953, Eisenhower Library The administration declared racial discrimination a national security issue, as Communists around the world used the racial discrimination and history of violence in the U.S. as a point of propaganda attack.Dudziak, Mary L. , Cold War Civil Rights Race and the Image of American Democracy Eisenhower told District of Columbia officials to make Washington a model for the rest of the country in integrating black and white public school children. He proposed to Congress the Civil Rights Act of 1957 and of 1960 and signed those acts into law. The 1957 act for the first time established a permanent civil rights office inside the Justice Department and a Civil Rights Commission to hear testimony about abuses of voting rights. Although both acts were much weaker than subsequent civil rights legislation, they constituted the first significant civil rights acts since 1875. In 1957, the state of Arkansas refused to honor a federal court order to integrate their public school system stemming from the Brown decision. Eisenhower demanded that Arkansas governor Orval Faubus obey the court order. When Faubus balked, the president placed the Arkansas National Guard under federal control and sent in the 101st Airborne Division. They escorted and protected nine black students entry to Little Rock Central High School, an allwhite public school, for the first time since the Reconstruction Era. Martin Luther King Jr. wrote to Eisenhower to thank him for his actions, writing The overwhelming majority of southerners, Negro and white, stand firmly behind your resolute action to restore law and order in Little Rock.to DDE, September 25, 1957, Eisenhower Library Relations with Congress Eisenhower had a Republican Congress for only his first two years in office in the Senate, the Republican majority was by a onevote margin. Senator Robert A. Taft assisted the President greatly in working with the Old Guard, and was sorely missed when his death left Eisenhower with his successor William Knowland, whom Eisenhower disliked. This prevented Eisenhower from openly condemning Joseph McCarthys highly criticized methods against communism. To facilitate relations with Congress, Eisenhower decided to ignore McCarthys controversies and thereby deprive them of more energy from involvement of the White House. This position drew criticism from a number of corners. In late 1953, McCarthy declared on national television that the employment of communists within the government was a menace and would be a pivotal issue in the 1954 Senate elections. Eisenhower was urged to respond directly and specify the various measures he had taken to purge the government of communists. Among Eisenhowers objectives in not directly confronting McCarthy was to prevent McCarthy from dragging the Atomic Energy Commission into McCarthys witch hunt for communists, which would interfere with, and perhaps delay, the AECs important work on Hbombs. The administration had discovered through its own investigations that one of the leading scientists on the AEC, J. Robert Oppenheimer, had urged that the Hbomb work be delayed. Eisenhower removed him from the agency and revoked his security clearance, though he knew this would create fertile ground for McCarthy. In May 1955, McCarthy threatened to issue subpoenas to White House personnel. Eisenhower was furious, and issued an order as follows It is essential to efficient and effective administration that employees of the Executive Branch be in a position to be completely candid in advising with each other on official matters... it is not in the public interest that any of their conversations or communications, or any documents or reproductions, concerning such advice be disclosed. This was an unprecedented step by Eisenhower to protect communication beyond the confines of a cabinet meeting, and soon became a tradition known as executive privilege. Ikes denial of McCarthys access to his staff reduced McCarthys hearings to rants about trivial matters, and contributed to his ultimate downfall. In early 1954, the Old Guard put forward a constitutional amendment, called the Bricker Amendment, which would curtail international agreements by the Chief Executive, such as the Yalta Agreements. Eisenhower opposed the measure. The Old Guard agreed with Eisenhower on the development and ownership of nuclear reactors by private enterprises, which the Democrats opposed. The President succeeded in getting legislation creating a system of licensure for nuclear plants by the AEC. The Democrats gained a majority in both houses in the 1954 election. Eisenhower had to work with the Democratic Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson in the Senate and Speaker Sam Rayburn in the House, both from Texas. Joe Martin, the Republican Speaker from 1947 to 1949 and again from 1953 to 1955, wrote that Eisenhower never surrounded himself with assistants who could solve political problems with professional skill. There were exceptions, Leonard W. Hall, for example, who as chairman of the Republican National Committee tried to open the administrations eyes to the political facts of life, with occasional success. However, these exceptions were not enough to right the balance.Joseph W. Martin as told to Donavan, Robert J. , My First Fifty Years in Politics , New York McGraw Hill, p. 227 Speaker Martin concluded that Eisenhower worked too much through subordinates in dealing with Congress, with results, often the reverse of what he has desired because Members of Congress, resent having some young fellow who was picked up by the White House without ever having been elected to office himself coming around and telling them The Chief wants this. The administration never made use of many Republicans of consequence whose services in one form or another would have been available for the asking. Judicial appointments Supreme Court Eisenhower appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States Earl Warren, 1953 John Marshall Harlan II, 1954 William J. Brennan, 1956 Charles Evans Whittaker, 1957 Potter Stewart, 1958 Whittaker was unsuited for the role and soon retired. Stewart and Harlan were conservative Republicans, while Brennan was a Democrat who became a leading voice for liberalism.Newton, Eisenhower pp. 356 7 In selecting a Chief Justice, Eisenhower looked for an experienced jurist who could appeal to liberals in the party as well as lawandorder conservatives, noting privately that Warren represents the kind of political, economic, and social thinking that I believe we need on the Supreme Court... He has a national name for integrity, uprightness, and courage that, again, I believe we need on the Court. In the next few years Warren led the Court in a series of liberal decisions that revolutionized the role of the Court. States admitted to the Union Alaska January 3, 1959 49th state Hawaii August 21, 1959 50th state Health issues Eisenhower began chain smoking cigarettes at West Point, often three or four packs a day. He joked that he gave himself an order to stop cold turkey in 1949. But Evan Thomas says the true story was more complex. At first he removed cigarettes and ashtrays, but that did not work. He told a friend I decided to make a game of the whole business and try to achieve a feeling of some superiority.... So I stuffed cigarettes in every pocket, put them around my office on the desk....and made it a practice to offer a cigarette to anyone who came in... while mentally reminding myself as I sat down, I do not have to do what that poor fellow is doing. He was the first president to release information about his health and medical records while in office, but people around him deliberately misled the public about his health. On September 24, 1955, while vacationing in Colorado, he had a serious heart attack.Newton, Eisenhower pp 19699. Dr. Howard Snyder, his personal physician, misdiagnosed the symptoms as indigestion, and failed to call in the help that was urgently needed. Snyder later falsified his own records to cover his blunder and to protect Eisenhowers need to portray he was healthy enough to do his job.Clarence G. Lasby, Eisenhowers Heart Attack How Ike Beat Heart Disease and Held on to the Presidency pp 57113.Robert P. Hudson, Eisenhowers Heart Attack How Ike Beat Heart Disease and Held on to the Presidency Bulletin of the History of Medicine 721 pp. 161 162 online.R.H. Ferrell, IllAdvised Presidential Health Public Trust , pp. 53 150 The heart attack required six weeks hospitalization, during which time Nixon, Dulles, and Sherman Adams assumed administrative duties and provided communication with the President. He was treated by Dr. Paul Dudley White, a cardiologist with a national reputation, who regularly informed the press of the Presidents progress. Instead of eliminating him as a candidate for a second term as President, his physician recommended a second term as essential to his recovery. As a consequence of his heart attack, Eisenhower developed a left ventricular aneurysm, which was in turn the cause of a mild stroke on November 25, 1957. This incident occurred during a cabinet meeting when Eisenhower suddenly found himself unable to speak or move his right hand. The stroke had caused an aphasia. The president also suffered from Crohns disease, chronic inflammatory condition of the intestine, which necessitated surgery for a bowel obstruction on June 9, 1956. To treat the intestinal block, surgeons bypassed about ten inches of his small intestine. His scheduled meeting with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru was postponed so he could recover at his farm. He was still recovering from this operation during the Suez Crisis. Eisenhowers health issues forced him to give up smoking and make some changes to his dietary habits, but he still indulged in alcohol. During a visit to England he complained of dizziness and had to have his blood pressure checked on August 29, 1959 however, before dinner at Chequers on the next day his doctor General Howard Snyder recalled Eisenhower drank several ginandtonics, and one or two gins on the rocks... three or four wines with the dinner.Williams, Charles Harold Macmillan p. 345 The last three years of Eisenhowers second term in office were ones of relatively good health. Eventually after leaving the White House, he suffered several additional and ultimately crippling heart attacks. A severe heart attack in August 1965 largely ended his participation in public affairs. In August 1966 he began to show symptoms of cholecystitis, for which he underwent surgery on December 12, 1966, when his gallbladder was removed, containing 16 gallstones. After Eisenhowers death in 1969 , an autopsy unexpectedly revealed an adrenal pheochromocytoma,Messerli FH, Loughlin KR, Messerli AW, Welch WR The President and the pheochromocytoma. Am J Cardiol 2007 99 1325 1329. a benign adrenalinesecreting tumor that may have made the President more vulnerable to heart disease. Eisenhower suffered seven heart attacks in total from 1955 until his death. End of presidency The official White House portrait of Dwight D. Eisenhower The 22nd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was ratified in 1951, and it set term limits to the presidency of two terms. Truman as the incumbent was not covered. Eisenhower became the first U.S. president constitutionally prevented from running for reelection to a third term. Eisenhower was also the first outgoing President to come under the protection of the Former Presidents Act two living former Presidents, Herbert Hoover and Harry S. Truman, left office before the Act was passed. Under the act, Eisenhower was entitled to receive a lifetime pension, stateprovided staff and a Secret Service detail. In the 1960 election to choose his successor, Eisenhower endorsed Nixon over Democrat John F. Kennedy. He told friends, I will do almost anything to avoid turning my chair and country over to Kennedy. He actively campaigned for Nixon in the final days, although he may have done Nixon some harm. When asked by reporters at the end of a televised press conference to list one of Nixons policy ideas he had adopted, Eisenhower joked, If you give me a week, I might think of one. I dont remember. Kennedys campaign used the quote in one of its campaign commercials. Nixon narrowly lost to Kennedy. Eisenhower, who was the oldest president in history at that time , was succeeded by the youngest elected president, as Kennedy was 43. It was originally intended for President Eisenhower to have a more active role in the campaign as he wanted to respond to attacks Kennedy made on his administration. However, First Lady Mamie Eisenhower expressed concern to Second Lady Pat Nixon about the strain campaigning would put on his heart and wanted the President to back out of it without letting him know of her intervention. Vice President Nixon himself also received concern from White House physician Major General Howard Snyder, who informed him that he could not approve a heavy campaign schedule for the President and his health had been exacerbated by Kennedys attacks. Nixon then convinced Eisenhower not to go ahead with the expanded campaign schedule and limit himself to the original schedule. Nixon reflected that if Eisenhower had carried out his expanded campaign schedule he might have had a decisive impact on the outcome of the election, especially in states that Kennedy won with razorthin margins. It was years later before Mamie told Dwight why Nixon changed his mind on Dwights campaigning.Nixon, Richard, The Memoirs of Richard Nixon, 1978, pp. 222 3. Eisenhowers farewell address, January 17, 1961. Length 1530. On January 17, 1961, Eisenhower gave his final televised Address to the Nation from the Oval Office. In his farewell speech, Eisenhower raised the issue of the Cold War and role of the U.S. armed forces. He described the Cold War We face a hostile ideology global in scope, atheistic in character, ruthless in purpose and insidious in method... and warned about what he saw as unjustified government spending proposals and continued with a warning that we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military industrial complex. He elaborated, we recognize the imperative need for this development... the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist... Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together. Because of legal issues related to holding a military rank while in a civilian office, Eisenhower had resigned his permanent commission as General of the Army before entering the office of President of the United States. Upon completion of his Presidential term, his commission was reactivated by Congress and Eisenhower again was commissioned a fivestar general in the United States Army. Post Presidential Years . Eisenhower Archives. President Kennedy reactivated his commission as a five star general in the United States Army. With the exception of George Washington, Eisenhower is the only United States President with military service to reenter the Armed Forces after leaving the office of President. Postpresidency, death and funeral Eisenhower speaks to the press at the 1964 Republican National Convention President Lyndon Johnson with Eisenhower aboard Air Force One in October 1965 Eisenhowers funeral service Graves of Dwight D. Eisenhower, Doud Dwight Icky Eisenhower and Mamie Eisenhower in Abilene, Kansas Following the presidency, Eisenhower moved to the place where he and Mamie had spent much of their postwar time. The home was a working farm adjacent to the battlefield at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, 70 miles from his ancestral home in Elizabethville, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania. They also maintained a retirement home in Palm Desert, California. In 1967 the Eisenhowers donated the Gettysburg farm to the National Park Service. After leaving office, Eisenhower did not completely retreat from political life. He flew to San Antonio, where he had been stationed years earlier, to support John W. Goode, the unsuccessful Republican candidate against the Democrat Henry B. Gonzalez for Texas 20th congressional district seat. He addressed the 1964 Republican National Convention, in San Francisco, and appeared with party nominee Barry Goldwater in a campaign commercial from his Gettysburg retreat. That endorsement came somewhat reluctantly because Goldwater had in the late 1950s criticized Eisenhowers administration as a dimestore New Deal. On January 20, 1969, the day Nixon was inaugurated as President, Eisenhower issued a statement praising his former vice president and calling it a day for rejoicing. On the morning of March 28, 1969, Eisenhower died in Washington, D.C., of congestive heart failure at Walter Reed Army Medical Center he was 78 years old. The following day, his body was moved to the Washington National Cathedrals Bethlehem Chapel, where he lay in repose for 28 hours. On March 30, his body was brought by caisson to the United States Capitol, where he lay in state in the Capitol Rotunda. On March 31, Eisenhowers body was returned to the National Cathedral, where he was given an Episcopal Church funeral service. That evening, Eisenhowers body was placed onto a special train for its journey from the nations capital to Abilene, Kansas. This was the last time a funeral train has been used as part of funeral proceedings for an American president. His body arrived on April 2, and was interred that day in a small chapel on the grounds of the Eisenhower Presidential Library. The presidents body was buried as a General of the Army. The family used an 80 standard soldiers casket, and dressed his body in his famous short green jacket. The medals worn were the Army Distinguished Service Medal with three oak leaf clusters, the Navy Distinguished Service Medal, and the Legion of Merit. Eisenhower is buried alongside his son Doud, who died at age 3 in 1921. His wife Mamie was buried next to him after her death a decade later in 1979. President Richard Nixon eulogized Eisenhower, saying Some men are considered great because they lead great armies or they lead powerful nations. For eight years now, Dwight Eisenhower has neither commanded an army nor led a nation and yet he remained through his final days the worlds most admired and respected man, truly the first citizen of the world. Legacy and memory Eisenhowers reputation declined in the immediate years after he left office. During his presidency, he was widely seen by critics as an inactive, uninspiring, golfplaying president. This was in stark contrast to his vigorous young successor, John F. Kennedy, who was 26 years his junior. Despite his unprecedented use of Army troops to enforce a federal desegregation order at Central High School in Little Rock, Eisenhower was criticized for his reluctance to support the civil rights movement to the degree that activists wanted. Eisenhower also attracted criticism for his handling of the 1960 U2 incident and the associated international embarrassment, for the Soviet Unions perceived leadership in the nuclear arms race and the Space Race, and for his failure to publicly oppose McCarthyism. In particular, Eisenhower was criticized for failing to defend George Marshall from attacks by Joseph McCarthy, though he privately deplored McCarthys tactics and claims. Eisenhower signs the legislation that changes Armistice Day to Veterans Day, June 1, 1954. Historian John Lewis Gaddis has summarized the turnaround in evaluations by historians Historians long ago abandoned the view that Eisenhowers was a failed presidency. He did, after all, end the Korean War without getting into any others. He stabilized, and did not escalate, the SovietAmerican rivalry. He strengthened European alliances while withdrawing support from European colonialism. He rescued the Republican Party from isolationism and McCarthyism. He maintained prosperity, balanced the budget, promoted technological innovation, facilitated the civil rights movement and warned, in the most memorable farewell address since Washingtons, of a military industrial complex that could endanger the nations liberties. Not until Reagan would another president leave office with so strong a sense of having accomplished what he set out to do.John Lewis Gaddis, He Made It Look Easy Eisenhower in War and Peace, by Jean Edward Smith, New York Times Book Review , April 20, 2012. Although conservatism in politics was strong during the 1950s and Eisenhower generally espoused conservative sentiments, his administration concerned itself mostly with foreign affairs and pursued a handsoff domestic policy. Eisenhower looked to moderation and cooperation as a means of governance. Although he sought to slow or contain the New Deal and other federal programs, he did not attempt to repeal them outright, and in doing so was popular among the liberal wing of the Republican Party. Conservative critics of his administration found that he did not do enough to advance the goals of the right according to Hans Morgenthau, Eisenhowers victories were but accidents without consequence in the history of the Republican party.Morgenthau, Hans J. Goldwater The Romantic Regression, in Commentary, September 1964. President John F. Kennedy meets with Eisenhower at Camp David, April 22, 1961, three days after the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion. Since the 19th century, many if not all presidents were assisted by a central figure or gatekeeper, sometimes described as the presidents private secretary, sometimes with no official title at all. Eisenhower formalized this role, introducing the office of White House Chief of Staff an idea he borrowed from the United States Army. Every president after Lyndon Johnson has also appointed staff to this position. Initially, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter tried to operate without a chief of staff, but each eventually appointed one. As president, Eisenhower also initiated the up or out policy that still prevails in the U.S. military, whereby officers who are passed over for promotion twice are usually honorably but quickly discharged to make way for younger, more able officers. On December 20, 1944, Eisenhower was appointed to the rank of General of the Army, placing him in the company of George Marshall, Henry Hap Arnold, and Douglas MacArthur, the only four men to achieve the rank in World War Two, and along with Omar Bradley, one of only five men to achieve the rank since the August 5, 1888 death of Philip Sheridan, and the only five men to hold the rank as a Fivestar general. The rank was created by an Act of Congress on a temporary basis when Public Law 78482 was passed on 14 December 1944, This law allowed only 75 of pay and allowances to the grade for those on the retired list. as a temporary rank, subject to reversion to permanent rank six months after the end of the war. The temporary rank was then declared permanent 23 March 1946 by Public Law 333 of the 79th Congress, which also awarded full pay and allowances in the grade to those on the retired list. The retirement provisions were also applied to the World War II Commandant of the Marine Corps and the Commandant of the Coast Guard, both of whom held fourstar rank. It was created to give the most senior American commanders parity of rank with their British counterparts holding the ranks of field marshal and admiral of the fleet. This second General of the Army rank is not the same as the postCivil War era version because of its purpose and five stars. Eisenhower founded People to People International in 1956, based on his belief that citizen interaction would promote cultural interaction and world peace. The program includes a student ambassador component, which sends American youth on educational trips to other countries. During his second term as president, Eisenhower distinctively preserved his presidential gratitude by awarding individuals a special memento. This memento was a series of specially designed U.S. Mint presidential appreciation medals. Eisenhower presented the medal as an expression of his appreciation and the medal is a keepsake reminder for the recipient. The development of the appreciation medals was initiated by the White House and executed by the Bureau of the Mint through the U.S. Mint in Philadelphia. The medals were struck from September 1958 through October 1960. A total of twenty designs are cataloged with a total mintage of 9,858. Each of the designs incorporates the text with appreciation or with personal and official gratitude accompanied with Eisenhowers initials D.D.E. or facsimile signature. The design also incorporates location, date, andor significant event. Prior to the end of his second term as President, 1,451 medals were turned in to the Bureau of the Mint and destroyed. The Eisenhower appreciation medals are part of the Presidential Medal of Appreciation Award Medal Series. Tributes and memorials Eisenhower Interstate System sign south of San Antonio, Texas Bronze statue of Eisenhower at Capitol rotunda The Interstate Highway System is officially known as the Dwight D. Eisenhower National System of Interstate and Defense Highways in his honor. It was inspired in part by Eisenhowers own Army experiences in World War II, where he recognized the advantages of the autobahn system in Germany. Commemorative signs reading Eisenhower Interstate System and bearing Eisenhowers permanent 5star rank insignia were introduced in 1993 and now are displayed throughout the Interstate System. Several highways are also named for him, including the Eisenhower Expressway near Chicago. the Eisenhower Tunnel on Interstate 70 west of Denver, and Interstate 80 in California. Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy is a senior war college of the Department of Defenses National Defense University in Washington, DC. Eisenhower graduated from this school when it was previously known as the Army Industrial College. The schools building on Fort Lesley J. McNair, when it was known as the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, was dedicated as Eisenhower Hall in 1960. Eisenhower was honored on a US one dollar coin, minted from 1971 to 1978. His centenary was honored on a commemorative dollar coin issued in 1990. In 1969, four major record companies ABC Records, MGM Records, Buddha Records and Caedmon Audio released tribute albums in Eisenhowers honor. In 1999, the United States Congress created the Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Commission, to create an enduring national memorial in Washington, D.C.. In 2009, the commission chose the architect Frank Gehry to design the memorial. The memorial will stand on a fouracre site near the National Mall on Maryland Avenue, SW across the street from the National Air and Space Museum. Awards and decorations The star of the Soviet Order of Victory awarded to EisenhowerPrince Bernhard of the Netherlands in an interview with H.G. Meijer, published in Het Vliegerkruis, Amsterdam 1997, . p. 92. The coat of arms granted to Eisenhower upon his incorporation as a knight of the Order of the Elephant in 1950. The anvil represents the fact that his name is derived from the German for iron hewer. U.S. Military Decorations Army Distinguished Service Medal w 4 oak leaf clusters Navy Distinguished Service Medal Legion of Merit U.S. Service Medals Mexican Border Service Medal World War I Victory Medal American Defense Service Medal EuropeanAfricanMiddle Eastern Campaign Medal w 9 campaign stars World War II Victory Medal Army of Occupation Medal w Germany clasp National Defense Service Medal w 1 service star International and Foreign Awards Order of the Liberator San Martin, Grand Cross Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold with Sash Order of Leopold, Grand Cordon Croix de guerre w palm Order of the Southern Cross, Grand Cross Order of Military Merit, Grand Cross Order of Aeronautical Merit, Grand Cross War Medal Campaign Medal Order of Merit, Grand Cross Order of the Cloud and Banner, with Special Grand Cordon, Military Order of the White Lion, Grand Cross War Cross 1939 1945 Order of the Elephant, Knight Order of Abdon Caldern, First Class Order of Ismail, Grand Cordon Order of Solomon, Knight Grand Cross with Cordon Order of the Queen of Sheba, Member Legion of Honor, Grand Cross Order of Liberation, Companion Military Medal Croix de guerre w palm Royal Order of George I, Knight Grand Cross with Swords Order of the Redeemer, Knight Grand Cross Cross of Military Merit, First Class National Order of Honour and Merit, Grand Cross with Gold Badge Order of the Holy Sepulchre, Knight Grand Cross Military Order of Italy, Knight Grand Cross with Swords Order of the Chrysanthemum, Collar Order of the Oak Crown, Grand Cross 60px Military Medal Order pro merito Melitensi, KGC Order of the Aztec Eagle, Collar Medal of Military Merit Medal of Civic Merit Order of Ouissam Alaouite, Grand Cross Order of the Netherlands Lion, Knight Grand Cross Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav, Grand Cross Order of NishanePakistan, First Class Orden Vasco Nez de Balboa, Grand Cross Order of Manuel Amador Guerrero, Grand Collar Order of Sikatuna, Grand Collar Legion of Honor , Chief Commander Distinguished Service Star, Order of Polonia Restituta, Grand Cross Order of Virtuti Militari, First Class Cross of Grunwald, First Class Order of the Royal House of Chakri, Knight Order of Glory, Grand Cordon Order of the Bath, Knight Grand Cross Order of Merit, Member Africa Star, with 8 and 1 numerical devices Order of Victory, Star Order of Suvorov, First Class The Royal Yugoslav Commemorative War Cross Other honors An apartment at the top of the Culzean Castle in Scotland was given to General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower in recognition of his role as Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces in Europe during the Second World War. The General first visited Culzean Castle in 1946 and stayed there four times, including once while President of the United States. An Eisenhower exhibition occupies one of the rooms, with mementos of his lifetime. In June 1945, Eisenhower received an honorary Freedom of the City of London. In January 1946, The Metropolitan Museum of Art named Eisenhower an Honorary Fellow for Life in recognition of his efforts to recover art looted by the Nazis during World War II.Finding aid for the Metropolitan Museum of Art 75th Anniversary Committee records, 1945 1950, Metropolitan Museum of Art. In 1965, Eisenhower received an honorary doctorate from Grinnell College in Grinnell, Iowa. In 1966, Eisenhower was the second person awarded Civitan Internationals World Citizenship Award. In May 1967, Eisenhower was made an honorary brother of Epsilon Eta Chapter of Tau Epsilon Phi Fraternity. In December 1999, he was listed on Gallups List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th century. In 2009, he was named to the World Golf Hall of Fame in the Lifetime Achievement category for his contributions to the sport. Promotions No insignia Cadet, United States Military Academy June 14, 1911 No pin insignia in 1915 Second Lieutenant, Regular Army June 12, 1915 13px First Lieutenant, Regular Army July 1, 1916 33px Captain, Regular Army May 15, 1917 40px Major, National Army June 17, 1918 40px Lieutenant Colonel, National Army October 20, 1918 33px Captain, Regular Army June 30, 1920 40px Major, Regular Army July 2, 1920 33px Captain, Regular Army November 4, 1922 40px Major, Regular Army August 26, 1924 40px Lieutenant Colonel, Regular Army July 1, 1936 60px Colonel, Army of the United States March 6, 1941 33px Brigadier General, Army of the United States September 29, 1941 66px Major General, Army of the United States March 27, 1942 99px Lieutenant General, Army of the United States July 7, 1942 132px General, Army of the United States February 11, 1943 33px Brigadier General, Regular Army August 30, 1943 66px Major General, Regular Army August 30, 1943 100px General of the Army, Army of the United States December 20, 1944 100px General of the Army, Regular Army April 11, 1946 Note Eisenhower relinquished his active duty status when he became president on January 20, 1953. He was returned to active duty when he left office eight years later. Family tree See also And I dont care what it is, phrase by Eisenhower, 1952, on religion Atoms for Peace, a speech to the UN General Assembly in December 1953 Eisenhower baseball controversy Eisenhower Dollar Eisenhower method for time management Eisenhower National Historic Site Eisenhower on U.S. Postage stamps Eisenhower Presidential Center People to People Student Ambassador Program Kay Summersby Ike Countdown to DDay a 2004 American television film about the decisions Eisenhower made as Supreme Commander that led to the successful DDay invasion of World War II Pressure a 2014 British play on Eisenhowers part in the meteorological decisions leading up to DDay he was played in the premiere production by Malcolm Sinclair General History of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience Historical rankings of United States Presidents References Bibliography General biographies Krieg, Joann P. ed. . Dwight D. Eisenhower, Soldier, President, Statesman . 24 essays by scholars. Military career Ambrose, Stephen E. The Supreme Commander The War Years of Dwight D. Eisenhower excerpt and text search Ambrose, Stephen E. . The Victors Eisenhower and his Boys The Men of World War II , New York Simon Schuster. Eisenhower, David . Eisenhower at War 1943 1945 , New York Random House. . A detailed study by his grandson. Eisenhower, John S. D. . General Ike , Free Press, New York. Irish, Kerry E. Apt Pupil Dwight Eisenhower and the 1930 Industrial Mobilization Plan, The Journal of Military History 70.1 31 61 online in Project Muse. Civilian career Bowie, Robert R. and Immerman, Richard H. . Waging Peace How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold War Strategy , Oxford University Press. Chernus, Ira . Apocalypse Management Eisenhower and the Discourse of National Insecurity , Stanford University Press. Damms, Richard V. . The Eisenhower Presidency, 1953 1961 David Paul T., ed. . Presidential Nominating Politics in 1952 . 5 vols., Johns Hopkins Press. Divine, Robert A. . Eisenhower and the Cold War . Gellman, Irwin F. . The President and the Apprentice Eisenhower and Nixon, 1952 1961. New Haven, CT Yale University Press. Greenstein, Fred I. . The HiddenHand Presidency Eisenhower as Leader . Basic Books. Harris, Douglas B. Dwight Eisenhower and the New Deal The Politics of Preemption, Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 27, 1997. Harris, Seymour E. . The Economics of the Political Parties, with Special Attention to Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy . Lasby, Clarence G. Eisenhowers Heart Attack How Ike Beat Heart Disease and Held on to the Presidency Medhurst, Martin J. . Dwight D. Eisenhower Strategic Communicator. Westport, CT Greenwood Press. Mayer, Michael S. . The Eisenhower Years Facts on File. Newton, Jim. Eisenhower The White House Years Pach, Chester J., and Richardson, Elmo . Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower . University Press of Kansas. Watry, David M. . Diplomacy at the Brink Eisenhower, Churchill and Eden in the Cold War. Baton Rouge, LA Louisiana State University Press. Historiography and interpretations by scholars Burk, Robert. Eisenhower Revisionism Revisited Reflections on Eisenhower Scholarship, Historian , Spring 1988, Vol. 50, Issue 2, pp.196 209 McAuliffe, Mary S. Eisenhower, the President, Journal of American History 68 , pp.625 32 McMahon, Robert J. Eisenhower and Third World Nationalism A Critique of the Revisionists, Political Science Quarterly 1013 pp.453 73 Polsky, Andrew J. Shifting Currents Dwight Eisenhower and the Dynamic of Presidential Opportunity Structure, Presidential Studies Quarterly , March 2015. Rabe, Stephen G. Eisenhower Revisionism A Decade of Scholarship, Diplomatic History 171 pp97 115. Schlesinger Jr., Arthur. The Ike Age Revisited, Reviews in American History 111 pp.1 11 Streeter, Stephen M. Interpreting the 1954 U.S. Intervention In Guatemala Realist, Revisionist, and Postrevisionist Perspectives, History Teacher 341 pp61 74. Primary sources Boyle, Peter G., ed. . The Churchill Eisenhower Correspondence, 1953 1955 . University of North Carolina Press. Boyle, Peter G., ed. . The Eden Eisenhower correspondence, 1955 1957 . University of North Carolina Press. Butcher, Harry C. . My Three Years With Eisenhower The Personal Diary of Captain Harry C. Butcher, USNR , candid memoir by a top aide Eisenhower, Dwight D. . Crusade in Europe , his war memoirs. Eisenhower, Dwight D. . The White House Years Waging Peace 1956 1961 , Doubleday and Co. online Eisenhower Papers 21volume scholarly edition complete for 1940 1961. Summersby, Kay . Eisenhower was My Boss , New York Prentice Hall Dell paperback. External links White House biography Eisenhower Presidential Library and Museum Eisenhower National Historic Site FBI Records The Vault Dwight David Ike Eisenhower Eisenhower Foundation Major speeches of Dwight Eisenhower Dwight D. Eisenhower A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress NATO Declassified Dwight D. Eisenhower Extensive essays on Dwight Eisenhower and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Life Portrait of Dwight D. Eisenhower, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , October 25, 1999 Dwight D. Eisenhower Personal Manuscripts and Letters Category1890 births Category1969 deaths Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury Presbyterians CategoryAmerican 5 star officers CategoryAmerican anticommunists CategoryAmerican military personnel of World War I CategoryAmerican military personnel of World War II CategoryAmerican people of German descent CategoryAmerican people of Irish descent CategoryAmerican people of Pennsylvania Dutch descent CategoryAmerican people of SwissGerman descent CategoryAmerican people of the Korean War CategoryAmerican Presbyterians CategoryArmy Black Knights football players CategoryBurials in Kansas CategoryCollars of the Order of the Aztec Eagle CategoryCompanions of the Liberation CategoryDwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy CategoryDwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy alumni Dwight D. CategoryFreemen of the City of London CategoryGrand Collars of the Order of Sikatuna CategoryGrand Cordons of the Order of Glory CategoryGrand Croix of the Lgion dhonneur CategoryGrand Crosses of the National Order of Honour and Merit CategoryGrand Crosses of the Order of George I with Swords CategoryGrand Crosses of the Order of Ouissam Alaouite CategoryGrand Crosses of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin CategoryGrand Crosses of the Order of the Oak Crown CategoryGrand Crosses of the Order of the Southern Cross CategoryGrand Crosses of the Order of the White Lion CategoryGrand Crosses of the Virtuti Militari CategoryHonorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath CategoryHonorary members of the Order of Merit CategoryTau Epsilon Phi CategoryKansas Republicans CategoryKnights Grand Cross of the Military Order of Savoy CategoryKnights of the Holy Sepulchre CategoryGrand Crosses of the Order of Polonia Restituta CategoryMilitary personnel from Kansas CategoryMilitary personnel from Pennsylvania CategoryMilitary personnel from Texas CategoryNational Rifle Association people CategoryNATO Supreme Allied Commanders CategoryNew York Republicans CategoryOperation Overlord people CategoryPennsylvania Republicans CategoryPeople from Abilene, Kansas CategoryPeople from Denison, Texas CategoryPeople from Gettysburg, Pennsylvania CategoryPeople of the Congo Crisis CategoryPresidents of Columbia University CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRecipients of the Croix de guerre CategoryRecipients of the Croix de guerre 1939 1945 CategoryRecipients of the Order of the Cross of Grunwald, 1st class CategoryRecipients of the Czechoslovak War Cross CategoryRecipients of the Distinguished Service Medal CategoryRecipients of the Distinguished Service Star CategoryRecipients of the Grand Decoration with Sash for Services to the Republic of Austria CategoryRecipients of the Legion of Merit CategoryRecipients of the National Order of Merit CategoryRecipients of the Order of Abdon Caldern CategoryRecipients of the Order of Aeronautical Merit CategoryRecipients of the Order of Ismail CategoryRecipients of the Order of Military Merit CategoryRecipients of the Order of Solomon CategoryRecipients of the Order of Suvorov, 1st class CategoryRecipients of the Order of the Cloud and Banner CategoryRecipients of the Order of the Queen of Sheba CategoryRecipients of the Order of Victory CategoryRecipients of the Order pro merito Melitensi CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryUnited States Army Chiefs of Staff CategoryUnited States Army Command and General Staff College alumni CategoryUnited States Army generals CategoryUnited States Army War College alumni CategoryUnited States Military Academy alumni CategoryUnited States military governors CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1952 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1956 CategoryWorld Golf Hall of Fameinductees
Franklin Delano Roosevelt , commonly known as FDR , was an American statesman and political leader who served as the 32nd President of the United States from 1933 until his death in 1945. A Democrat, he won a record four presidential elections and emerged as a central figure in world events during the mid20th century. He directed the United States government during most of the Great Depression, implementing his New Deal domestic agenda in response to the worst economic crisis in U.S. history. As a dominant leader of his party, he built the New Deal Coalition, realigning American politics into the Fifth Party System and defining American liberalism throughout the middle third of the 20th century. His third and fourth terms were dominated by World War II. He is often rated by scholars as one of the three greatest U.S. Presidents, along with George Washington and Abraham Lincoln. Roosevelt was born in 1882 to a prominent DutchAmerican New York family and attended Groton School. He went on to graduate from Harvard College in 1903 and attended Columbia Law School before practicing law in New York City. In 1905, he married Eleanor Roosevelt, and the couple went on to have six children. He won election to the New York State Senate in 1910, and then served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy under President Woodrow Wilson during World War I. Roosevelt was James M. Coxs running mate on the Democratic Partys 1920 national ticket, but Cox was defeated by Warren G. Harding. In 1921, Roosevelt contracted a paralytic illness, which left his legs permanently paralyzed. He attempted to recover from the illness and founded the treatment center in Warm Springs, Georgia, for people with poliomyelitis. Roosevelt returned to public office by winning election as Governor of New York in 1928. He was in office from 1929 to 1933 and served as a reform governor, promoting programs to combat the economic crisis besetting the United States at the time. In the 1932 presidential election, Roosevelt defeated Republican President Herbert Hoover in a landslide. Roosevelt took office while the United States was in the midst of the worst economic crisis in its history. During the first 100 days of the 73rd United States Congress, Roosevelt spearheaded unprecedented federal legislation and issued a profusion of executive orders that instituted the New Deal a variety of programs designed to produce relief, recovery, and reform. He created numerous programs to provide relief to the unemployed and farmers while seeking economic recovery with the National Recovery Administration and other programs. He also instituted major regulatory reforms related to finance, communications, and labor, and presided over the end of Prohibition. The economy improved rapidly from 1933 1937 and Roosevelt won a landslide reelection in 1936, but the economy relapsed into a deep recession in 1937 1938. After the 1936 election, Roosevelt galvanized opposition by seeking passage of the Judiciary Reorganization Bill of 1937, which would have expanded the size of the Supreme Court of the United States. The bipartisan Conservative Coalition that formed in 1937 prevented passage of that bill and blocked the implementation of further New Deal programs and reforms. Major surviving programs and legislation implemented under Roosevelt include the Securities and Exchange Commission, the National Labor Relations Act, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Social Security. Roosevelt ran for reelection in 1940, and his victory made him the first and only president to serve for more than two terms. With World War II looming after 1938 with the Japanese invasion of China and the aggression of Nazi Germany, Roosevelt gave strong diplomatic and financial support to China, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union while remaining officially neutral. Following the Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, which he famously called a date which will live in infamy, Roosevelt obtained a declaration of war on Japan the next day, and a few days later, on Germany and Italy. Assisted by his top aide Harry Hopkins, and with very strong national support, he worked closely with British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin and Chinese Generalissimo Chiang Kaishek in leading the Allies against the Axis Powers. He supervised the mobilization of the U.S. economy to support the war effort and implemented a Germany first strategy, making the defeat of Germany a priority over that of Japan. He also initiated the development of the worlds first atomic bomb and worked with the other Allied leaders to lay the groundwork for the United Nations and other postwar institutions. Roosevelts physical health seriously declined during the war years, and he died in April 1945, weeks into his fourth term. The Axis Powers surrendered to the Allies in the months following Roosevelts death, during the presidency of Roosevelts successor, Harry S. Truman. Early life and marriage Early life and education Roosevelt was born on January 30, 1882, in the Hudson Valley town of Hyde Park, New York, to businessman James Roosevelt and his wife, Sara Ann Delano. Roosevelts parents, who were sixth cousins, both came from wealthy old New York families, the Roosevelt family and the Delano family, respectively. They were of mostly English descent Roosevelts patrilineal greatgrandfather, Jacobus Roosevelt III, was of Dutch ancestry, while his mothers maiden name could be traced to French Huguenot immigrant ancestors of the 17th century. Franklin was the only child of James and Saras marriage, though James had another son, James Rosy Roosevelt, from a previous marriage. Roosevelt grew up in an atmosphere of privilege. His father, had graduated from Harvard Law School in 1851 but chose not to practice law after receiving an inheritance from his grandfather. James was a prominent Bourbon Democrat when he took along fiveyearold Franklin to see President Grover Cleveland, the busy president told Franklin, I have one wish for you, little man, that you will never be President of the United States. Sara was the dominant influence in Franklins early years she once declared, My son Franklin is a Delano, not a Roosevelt at all. James, who was 54 when Franklin was born, was considered by some as a remote father, though biographer James MacGregor Burns indicates James interacted with his son more than was typical at the time. Frequent trips to Europe he made his first excursion at the age of two and went with his parents every year from the ages of seven to fifteen helped Roosevelt become conversant in German and French. Roosevelt attended Groton School, an Episcopal boarding school in Groton, Massachusetts 90 of the students were from families on the social register. He was strongly influenced by its headmaster, Endicott Peabody, who preached the duty of Christians to help the less fortunate and urged his students to enter public service. Forty years later Roosevelt said of Peabody, It was a blessing in my life to have the privilege of his guiding hand, and the headmaster remained a strong influence throughout his life, officiating at his wedding and visiting Roosevelt as president. Like all but two of his twenty one Groton classmates, Roosevelt went to Harvard College in nearby Cambridge, Massachusetts. Roosevelt was again an average student academically, and he later declared, I took economics courses in college for four years, and everything I was taught was wrong. He was a member of the Alpha Delta Phi fraternity and the Fly Club. Roosevelt was undistinguished as a student or athlete, but he became editorinchief of The Harvard Crimson daily newspaper, a position that required great ambition, energy, and the ability to manage others. Roosevelts father died in 1900, causing great distress for him. The following year, Roosevelts fifth cousin Theodore Roosevelt became President of the United States. Theodores vigorous leadership style and reforming zeal made him Franklins role model and hero. Nonetheless, Roosevelt campaigned for Theodores opponent, William Jennings Bryan, in the 1904 presidential election. Roosevelt graduated from Harvard in 1903 with an A.B. in history. Roosevelt entered Columbia Law School in 1904, but dropped out in 1907 after passing the New York bar exam. In 1908, he took a job with the prestigious Wall Street firm of Carter Ledyard Milburn, dealing mainly with corporate law. Marriage, family, and affairs In mid1902, Franklin was formally introduced to his future wife Eleanor Roosevelt, though they had met briefly as children. Eleanor and Franklin were fifth cousins, once removed, and Eleanor was the niece of Theodore Roosevelt. They began corresponding with each other after that meeting, and in October 1904, Franklin proposed marriage to Eleanor. At the time of their engagement, Roosevelt was twentytwo and Eleanor nineteen. Eleanor and Franklin with their first two children, 1908 On March 17, 1905, Roosevelt married Eleanor in New York City, despite the fierce resistance of his mother. While she did not dislike Eleanor, Sara Roosevelt was very possessive of her son, believing he was too young for marriage. She attempted to break the engagement several times. Eleanors uncle, President Theodore Roosevelt, stood in at the wedding for Eleanors deceased father Elliott, as Eleanor was his favorite niece. The young couple moved into Springwood, his familys estate at Hyde Park, where Roosevelts mother became a frequent house guest, much to Eleanors chagrin. The home was owned by Roosevelts mother until her death in 1941 and was very much her home as well. In addition, Franklin Roosevelt and his mother Sara did the planning and furnishing of a town house she had built for the young couple in New York City she had a twin house built alongside, with connections on every floor. Eleanor never felt it was her house. Biographer James MacGregor Burns said that young Roosevelt was selfassured and at ease in the upper class. In contrast, Eleanor at the time was shy and disliked social life, and at first stayed at home to raise their several children. Like his father had, Franklin left the raising of the children to his wife, while Eleanor in turn largely relied on hired caregivers to raise the children. Referring to her early experience as a mother, she later stated that she knew absolutely nothing about handling or feeding a baby. Although Eleanor had an aversion to sexual intercourse and considered it an ordeal to be endured, she and Franklin had six children, the first four in rapid succession Anna Eleanor Roosevelt James Roosevelt II Franklin Roosevelt Elliott Roosevelt Franklin Delano Roosevelt Jr. John Aspinwall Roosevelt II Roosevelt had various extramarital affairs, including one with Eleanors social secretary Lucy Mercer, which began soon after she was hired in early 1914. In September 1918, Eleanor found letters revealing the affair in Roosevelts luggage. Franklin contemplated divorcing Eleanor, but Sara objected strongly and Lucy would not agree to marry a divorced man with five children. Franklin and Eleanor remained married, and Roosevelt promised never to see Lucy again. Eleanor never truly forgave him, and their marriage from that point on was more of a political partnership. Eleanor soon thereafter established a separate house in Hyde Park at ValKill, and increasingly devoted herself to various social and political causes independently of her husband. The emotional break in their marriage was so severe that when Roosevelt asked Eleanor in 1942 in light of his failing health to come back home and live with him again, she refused. Franklin broke his promise to Eleanor to refrain from having affairs. He and Lucy maintained a formal correspondence, and began seeing each other again in 1941, or perhaps earlier. Lucy was with Roosevelt on the day he died in 1945. Despite this, Roosevelts affair was not widely known until the 1960s. Roosevelts son Elliott claimed that his father had a 20year affair with his private secretary, Marguerite Missy LeHand. Another son, James, stated that there is a real possibility that a romantic relationship existed between his father and Princess Mrtha of Sweden, who resided in the White House during part of World War II. Aides began to refer to her at the time as the presidents girlfriend, and gossip linking the two romantically appeared in the newspapers. Image gallery FileSpringwood Home of FDR August 2012.jpgThe birthplace of Roosevelt at Springwood FileFdrwithparents.jpgRoosevelt sailing with halfniece Helen and father James, 1899 FileER FDR Camobello 1904 crop.jpgFranklin and Eleanor at Campobello Island, Canada, in 1904 FileFranklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Statues.JPGEleanor and Franklin statues at FDR National Historic Site in Hyde Park, New York FileFranklin D. Roosevelt, James R. Roosevelt, Jr, and Helen R. Roosevelt in Bicester, England NARA 196561.jpgFranklin with nephew Tadd and niece Helen in January 1889 File16 24 125 FDR statue.jpgSculpture at Dowdells Knob in F. D. Roosevelt State Park FileFranklin D. Rooseveltand cousins in Fairhaven, Massachusetts NARA 195346.jpg Roosevelt and cousins in Fairhaven, Massachusetts Early political career State senator and Tammany antagonist Roosevelt held little passion for the practice of law, and confided to friends that he planned to eventually enter politics. Prior to the 1910 elections, the local Democratic Party recruited Roosevelt to run for a seat in the New York State Assembly. Roosevelts campaign for the state assembly ended after the Democratic incumbent, Lewis Stuyvesant Chanler, chose to seek reelection. Rather than putting his political hopes on hold, Roosevelt ran for a seat in the state senate. The senate district, located in Dutchess County, Columbia County, and Putnam County, was strongly Republican, having elected one Democrat since 1856. The local party chose Roosevelt because his Republican cousin Theodore was still one of the countrys most prominent politicians, and a Democratic Roosevelt was good publicity the candidate could also pay for his own campaign. Roosevelt, who acted as his own campaign manager, traveled throughout the district via automobile at a time when many could not afford cars. Due to his aggressive and effective campaign, the Roosevelt names influence in the Hudson Valley, and the Democratic landslide that year, Roosevelt won the election, surprising almost everyone. Though legislative sessions rarely lasted more than ten weeks, Roosevelt treated his new position as a fulltime career. Taking his seat on January 1, 1911, Roosevelt immediately became the leader of a group of Insurgents who opposed the bossism of the Tammany Hall machine that dominated the state Democratic Party. In the 1911 U.S. Senate election, which was determined in a joint session of the New York state legislature, Roosevelt opposed the Tammany candidate, William F. Sheehan. On March 31, after a prolonged deadlock, compromise candidate James A. OGorman was elected, giving Roosevelt national exposure and some experience in political tactics and intrigue. One Tammany leader warned that Roosevelt should be eliminated immediately, before he disrupted Democrats as much as his cousin disrupted the Republicans. Roosevelt soon became a popular figure among New York Democrats, though he had not yet become an eloquent speaker. News articles and cartoons began depicting the second coming of a Roosevelt that sent cold shivers down the spine of Tammany. Roosevelt, again in opposition to Tammany Hall, supported New Jersey Governor Woodrow Wilsons successful bid for the 1912 Democratic nomination, earning an informal designation as an original Wilson man. Despite Theodore Roosevelts third party campaign for the presidency, Franklin Roosevelt continued to support Wilson in the general election, and Wilson became the first Democrat to win a presidential election since 1892. Overcoming a bout with typhoid fever, and due to the help of journalist Louis McHenry Howe, Roosevelt was reelected in the 1912 elections. After the elections, he served as chairman of the Agriculture Committee, and his success with farm and labor bills was a precursor to his New Deal policies twenty years later. By this time he had become more consistently progressive, in support of labor and social welfare programs for women and children cousin Theodore was of some influence on these issues. Assistant Secretary of the Navy Roosevelt as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, 1913 Roosevelts support of Wilson led to his appointment in March 1913 as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, the secondranking official in the Navy Department after Secretary Josephus Daniels. Roosevelt had a lifelong affection for the Navy he had already collected almost 10,000 naval books and claimed to have read all but one and was more ardent than his boss Daniels in supporting a large and efficient naval force. With Wilsons support, Daniels and Roosevelt instituted a meritbased promotion system and made other reforms to extend civilian control over the autonomous departments of the Navy. Roosevelt oversaw the Navys civilian employees and earned the respect of union leaders for his fairness in resolving disputes. Not a single strike occurred during his sevenplus years in the office, during which Roosevelt gained experience in labor issues, government management during wartime, naval issues, and logistics, all valuable areas for future office. In 1914, Roosevelt made an illconceived decision to run for the seat of retiring Republican Senator Elihu Root of New York. Though Roosevelt won the backing of Treasury Secretary William Gibbs McAdoo and Governor Martin H. Glynn, he faced a formidable opponent in the Tammanybacked James W. Gerard. He also lacked Wilsons backing, as Wilson needed Tammanys forces to help marshal his legislation and secure his 1916 reelection. Roosevelt was soundly defeated in the Democratic primary by Gerard, who in turn lost the general election to Republican James Wolcott Wadsworth Jr. Roosevelt learned a valuable lesson, that federal patronage alone, without White House support, could not defeat a strong local organization. After the election, Roosevelt and the boss of the Tammany Hall machine, Charles Francis Murphy, sought an accommodation with one another and became political allies. Following his defeat in the Senate primary, Roosevelt refocused on the Navy Department. World War I broke out in July 1914, with the Central Powers of Germany, AustriaHungary, and Ottoman Empire seeking to defeat the Allied Powers of Britain, France, and Russia. The Wilson administration initiated an expansion of the Navy after the sinking of the RMS Lusitania by a German submarine, and Roosevelt helped establish the United States Navy Reserve and the Council of National Defense. In March 1917, after Germany initiated its unrestricted submarine warfare campaign, Roosevelt asked Wilson for permission to fit the naval fleet out for war the request was denied. After the U.S. entrance into World War I in April 1917, he very much wanted to get into a military uniform, but the armistice took shape before this could materialize. The Navy expanded fourfold in the first six months of the war, and Roosevelt oversaw procurement and construction. In the summer of 1918, Roosevelt crossed the Atlantic, inspected naval facilities, and met with Winston Churchill. In September, he returned to the US on board the USS Leviathan , a large troop carrier. On the 11day voyage, the pandemic influenza virus struck and killed many on board. Roosevelt became very ill with influenza and a complicating pneumonia. He had recovered by the time the ship landed in New York. With the end of World War I in November 1918, Daniels and Roosevelt oversaw the demobilization of the Navy. Against the advice of older officers such as Admiral William Bensonwho claimed he could not conceive of any use the fleet will ever have for aviationRoosevelt personally ordered the preservation of the Navys Aviation Division. With the Wilson administration coming to an end, Roosevelt began planning for his next run for office. Roosevelt and his associates approached Herbert Hoover about running for the 1920 Democratic presidential nomination, with Roosevelt as his running mate. Campaign for Vice President Cox and Roosevelt in Ohio, 1920. Roosevelts plan to convince Hoover to run for the Democratic nomination fell through after Hoover publicly declared himself to be a Republican, but Roosevelt nonetheless decided to seek the 1920 vice presidential nomination. After Governor James M. Cox of Ohio won the partys presidential nomination, he chose Roosevelt as his running mate, and the party formally nominated Roosevelt by acclamation. Although his nomination surprised most people, Roosevelt was considered as bringing balance to the ticket as a moderate, a Wilsonian, and a prohibitionist with a famous name. Roosevelt had just turned 38, four years younger than Theodore had been when he received the same nomination from his party. Roosevelt resigned as Assistant Secretary of the Navy after the Democratic convention and campaigned across the nation for the Cox Roosevelt ticket. 1920 electoral vote results During the campaign, Cox and Roosevelt defended the Wilson administration and the League of Nations, both of which were unpopular in 1920. Roosevelt personally supported U.S. membership in the League of Nations, but, unlike Wilson, he favored compromising with Senator Henry Cabot Lodge and other Reservationists. The Cox Roosevelt ticket was defeated by Republicans Warren G. Harding and Calvin Coolidge in the presidential election by a wide margin, and the Republican ticket carried every state outside of the South. Roosevelt accepted the loss without issue and later reflected that the relationships and good will that he built in the 1920 campaign proved to be a major asset in his 1932 campaign. The 1920 election also saw the first public participation of Eleanor Roosevelt who, with the support of Louis Howe, established herself as a valuable political ally. After the election, Roosevelt returned to New York City, where he practiced law and became a vice president of the Fidelity and Deposit Company. Paralytic illness and political wilderness Rare photograph of Roosevelt in a wheelchair, with Fala and Ruthie Bie, the daughter of caretakers at his Hyde Park estate. Photo taken by his cousin Margaret Suckley After the 1920 presidential election, Roosevelt sought to build support for a political comeback in the 1922 elections, but his career was derailed by illness. While the Roosevelts were vacationing at Campobello Island, New Brunswick, in August 1921, Roosevelt fell ill. His main symptoms were fever symmetric, ascending paralysis facial paralysis bowel and bladder dysfunction numbness and hyperesthesia and a descending pattern of recovery. Roosevelt was left permanently paralyzed from the waist down. He was diagnosed with poliomyelitis at the time, but his symptoms are more consistent with Guillain Barr syndrome an autoimmune neuropathy which Roosevelts doctors failed to consider as a diagnostic possibility. Though his mother favored his retirement from public life, Roosevelt, his wife, and Roosevelts close friend and adviser, Louis Howe, were all determined that Roosevelt continue his political career. Roosevelt convinced many people that he was improving, which he believed to be essential prior to running for public office again. He laboriously taught himself to walk short distances while wearing iron braces on his hips and legs by swiveling his torso, supporting himself with a cane. He was careful never to be seen using his wheelchair in public, and great care was taken to prevent any portrayal in the press that would highlight his disability. However, his disability was well known before and during his presidency and became a major part of his image. He usually appeared in public standing upright, supported on one side by an aide or one of his sons. Beginning in 1925, Roosevelt spent most of his time in the Southern United States on his houseboat, the Larooco . Intrigued by the potential benefits of hydrotherapy, he established a rehabilitation center at Warm Springs, Georgia, in 1926. To create the rehabilitation center, Roosevelt assembled a staff of physical therapists and used most of his inheritance to purchase the Merriweather Inn. In 1938, he founded the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, leading to the development of polio vaccines. Roosevelt maintained contacts with the Democratic Party during the 1920s, especially in New York. He helped Al Smith win New Yorks 1922 gubernatorial election and in 1924 was a strong supporter of Smith against his cousin, Republican Theodore Roosevelt, Jr. Roosevelt gave nominating speeches for Smith at the 1924 and 1928 Democratic National Conventions the speech at the 1924 convention marked a return to public life following his illness and convalescence. He also established political alliances in the Southern United States, particularly in Georgia. Governor of New York Gov. Roosevelt with his predecessor Al Smith, 1930 As the Democratic Party presidential nominee in the 1928 election, Smith in turn asked Roosevelt to run for governor in the state election. Roosevelt resisted the entreaties of Smith and others within the party, but relented when party leaders convinced him that only he could defeat the Republican gubernatorial nominee, New York Attorney General Albert Ottinger. Roosevelt won the partys gubernatorial nomination by acclamation, and he once again turned to Louis Howe to lead his campaign. Roosevelt was also joined on the campaign trail by Samuel Irving Rosenman, Frances Perkins, and James Farley, all of whom would become important political associates. While Smith lost the presidency in a landslide, and was defeated in his home state, Roosevelt was narrowly elected governor by a onepercent margin. Roosevelts election as governor of the most populous state immediately made him a contender in the next presidential election. Upon taking office, Roosevelt proposed the construction of a series of hydroelectric power plants and sought to address the ongoing farm crisis of the 1920s. Relations between Roosevelt and Smith suffered after Roosevelt chose not to retain key Smith appointees like Robert Moses. Roosevelt and Eleanor established a political understanding that would last for the duration of his political career she would dutifully serve as the governors wife but was also be free to pursue her own agenda and interests. He also began holding fireside chats, in which he directly addressed his constituents via the radio, often using these chats to pressure the New York State Legislature to advance his agenda. Months into his tenure, the Wall Street Crash of 1929 occurred, and the country began sliding into the Great Depression. While President Hoover and many state governors believed that the economic crisis would subside, Roosevelt saw the seriousness of the situation and established a state employment commission. He also became the first governor to publicly endorse the idea of unemployment insurance. When Roosevelt began his run for a second term in May 1930, he reiterated his doctrine from the campaign two years before that progressive government by its very terms, must be a living and growing thing, that the battle for it is never ending and that if we let up for one single moment or one single year, not merely do we stand still but we fall back in the march of civilization. He ran on a platform that called for aid to farmers, full employment, unemployment insurance, and oldage pensions. His Republican opponent could not overcome the publics criticism of the Republican Party during the economic downturn, and Roosevelt was elected to a second term by a margin of 14. With the Hoover administration resisting proposals to directly address the economic crisis, Governor Roosevelt proposed an economic relief package and the establishment of the Temporary Emergency Relief Administration to distribute those funds. Led first by Jesse I. Straus and then by Harry Hopkins, the agency assisted well over one third of New Yorks population between 1932 and 1938. 1932 presidential election 1932 electoral vote results Roosevelt in 1933 As the 1932 presidential election approached, Roosevelt increasingly turned his attention to national politics. He established a campaign team led by Howe and Farley and a brain trust of policy advisers. With the economy ailing, many Democrats hoped that the 1932 elections would see the election of the first Democratic president since Woodrow Wilson. Roosevelts reelection had established him as the frontrunner for the 1932 Democratic presidential nomination. Roosevelt rallied the progressive supporters of the Wilson administration while also appealing to many conservatives, establishing himself as the leading candidate in the South and West. The chief opposition to Roosevelts candidacy came from Northeastern conservatives such as Al Smith, the 1928 Democratic presidential nominee. Smith hoped to deny Roosevelt the twothirds support necessary to win the partys presidential nomination 1932 Democratic National Convention, and then emerge as the nominee after multiple rounds of balloting. Roosevelt entered the convention with a delegate lead due to his success in the 1932 Democratic primaries, but most delegates entered the convention unbound to any particular candidate. On the first presidential ballot of the convention, Roosevelt received the votes of more than half but less than twothirds of the delegates, with Smith finishing in a distant second place. Speaker of the House John Nance Garner, who controlled the votes of Texas and California, threw his support behind Roosevelt after the third ballot, and Roosevelt clinched the nomination on the fourth ballot. With little input from Roosevelt, Garner won the vice presidential nomination. Roosevelt flew in from New York after learning that he had won the nomination, becoming the first major party presidential nominee to accept the nomination in person. In his acceptance speech, Roosevelt declared, I pledge you, I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people... This is more than a political campaign. It is a call to arms. Roosevelt promised securities regulation, tariff reduction, farm relief, governmentfunded public works, and other government actions to address the Great Depression. Reflecting changing public opinion, the Democratic platform included a call for the repeal of Prohibition Roosevelt himself had not taken a public stand on the issue prior to the convention but promised to uphold the party platform. After the convention, Roosevelt won endorsements from several progressive Republicans, including George W. Norris, Hiram Johnson, and Robert La Follette Jr. He also reconciled with the partys conservative wing, and even Al Smith was persuaded to support the Democratic ticket. Hoovers handling of the Bonus Army further damaged the incumbents popularity, as newspapers across the country criticized the use of force to disperse assembled veterans. Roosevelt won 57 of the popular vote and carried all but six states. Historians and political scientists consider the 1932 36 elections to be realigning elections. Roosevelts victory was enabled by the creation of the New Deal coalition, small farmers, the Southern whites, Catholics, big city political machines, labor unions, northern African Americans , Jews, intellectuals, and political liberals. The creation of the New Deal coalition transformed American politics and started what is called the New Deal Party System or the Fifth Party System. Between the Civil War and 1929, Democrats had rarely controlled both houses of Congress and had won just four of seventeen presidential elections from 1932 to 1979, Democrats won eight of twelve presidential elections and generally controlled both houses of Congress. Roosevelt was elected in November 1932 but, like his predecessors, would not take office until the following March. After the election, Hoover sought to convince Roosevelt to renounce much of his campaign platform and to endorse the Hoover administrations policies. Roosevelt refused Hoovers request to develop a joint program to stop the downward economic spiral, claiming that it would tie his hands, and that Hoover had all the power to act if necessary. The economy spiraled downward until the banking system began a complete nationwide shutdown as Hoovers term ended. Roosevelt used the transition period to select the personnel for his incoming administration, and he chose Howe as his chief of staff, Farley as Postmaster General, and Frances Perkins as Secretary of Labor. William H. Woodin, a Republican industrialist close to Roosevelt, was the choice for Secretary of the Treasury, while Roosevelt chose Senator Cordell Hull of Tennessee as Secretary of State. Harold L. Ickes and Henry A. Wallace, two progressive Republicans, were selected for the roles of Secretary of the Interior and Secretary of Agriculture, respectively. In February 1933, Roosevelt escaped an assassination attempt by Giuseppe Zangara, who expressed a hate for all rulers. Attempting to shoot Roosevelt, Zangara instead mortally wounded Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak, who was sitting alongside Roosevelt. Presidency Roosevelt appointed powerful men to top positions but made certain he made all the major decisions, regardless of delays, inefficiency or resentment. Analyzing the presidents administrative style, historian James MacGregor Burns concludes First and second terms Outgoing president Herbert Hoover and Roosevelt on Inauguration Day, 1933 When Roosevelt was inaugurated March 4, 1933, the U.S. was at the nadir of the worst depression in its history. A quarter of the workforce was unemployed. Farmers were in deep trouble as prices had fallen by 60. Industrial production had fallen by more than half since 1929. Two million people were homeless. By the evening of March 4, 32 of the 48 states as well as the District of Columbia had closed their banks. Historians categorized Roosevelts program as relief, recovery and reform. Relief was urgently needed by tens of millions of unemployed. Recovery meant boosting the economy back to normal. Reform meant longterm fixes of what was wrong, especially with the financial and banking systems. Through Roosevelts series of radio talks, known as fireside chats, he presented his proposals directly to the American public. Energized by his personal victory over his paralytic illness, Roosevelt relied on his persistent optimism and activism to renew the national spirit. First New Deal On his second day in office, Roosevelt declared a bank holiday and called for a special session of Congress to start March 9, on which date Congress passed the Emergency Banking Act. The act, which was based on a plan developed by the Hoover administration and Wall Street bankers, gave the president the power to determine the opening and closing of banks and authorized the Federal Reserve Banks to issue bank notes. The ensuing First 100 Days of the 73rd United States Congress saw an unprecedented spurt of legislation and set a benchmark against which future presidents would be compared. When the banks reopened on Monday, March 15, stock prices rose by 15 percent and bank deposits exceeded withdrawals, thus ending the bank panic. On March 22, Roosevelt signed the Cullen Harrison Act, which effectively ended federal Prohibition. Roosevelt presided over the establishment of several agencies and measures designed to provide relief for the unemployed and others in need. The Federal Emergency Relief Administration , under the leadership of Harry Hopkins, was designed to distribute relief to state governments. The Public Works Administration , under the leadership of Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes, was created to oversee the construction of largescale public works such as dams, bridges, and schools. The most popular of all New Deal agencies and Roosevelts favorite was the Civilian Conservation Corps , which hired 250,000 unemployed young men to work on rural local projects. Roosevelt also expanded a Hoover agency, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, making it a major source of financing for railroads and industry. Congress gave the Federal Trade Commission broad new regulatory powers and provided mortgage relief to millions of farmers and homeowners. Roosevelt also made agricultural relief a high priority and set up the Agricultural Adjustment Administration . The AAA tried to force higher prices for commodities by paying farmers to take land out of crops and to cut herds. Reform of the economy was the goal of the National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933. It sought to end cutthroat competition by forcing industries to come up with codes that established the rules of operation for all firms within specific industries, such as minimum prices, agreements not to compete, and production restrictions. Industry leaders negotiated the codes which were approved by NIRA officials. Industry needed to raise wages as a condition for approval. Provisions encouraged unions and suspended antitrust laws. NIRA was found to be unconstitutional by unanimous decision of the US Supreme Court in May 1935 Roosevelt strongly protested. Roosevelt reformed the financial regulatory structure of the nation with the Glass Steagall Act, creating the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to underwrite savings deposits. The act also sought to curb speculation by limiting affiliations between commercial banks and securities firms. In 1934, the Securities and Exchange Commission was created to regulate the trading of securities, while the Federal Communications Commission was established to regulate telecommunications. Recovery was pursued through pumppriming . The NIRA included 3.3billion of spending through the Public Works Administration. Roosevelt worked with Senator Norris to create the largest governmentowned industrial enterprise in American history the Tennessee Valley Authority which built dams and power stations, controlled floods, and modernized agriculture and home conditions in the povertystricken Tennessee Valley. Executive Order 6102 declared that all privately held gold of American citizens was to be sold to the U.S. Treasury and the price raised from 20 to 35 per ounce. The goal was to counter the deflation which was paralyzing the economy. Roosevelt tried to keep his campaign promise by cutting the federal budget including a reduction in military spending from 752million in 1932 to 531million in 1934 and a 40 cut in spending on veterans benefits by removing 500,000 veterans and widows from the pension rolls and reducing benefits for the remainder, as well as cutting the salaries of federal employees and reducing spending on research and education. But the veterans were well organized and strongly protested, and most benefits were restored or increased by 1934. Veterans groups such as the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars won their campaign to transform their benefits from payments due in 1945 to immediate cash when Congress overrode the Presidents veto and passed the Bonus Act in January 1936. It pumped sums equal to 2 of the GDP into the consumer economy and had a major stimulus effect. Second New Deal Roosevelt signs the Social Security Act into law, August 14, 1935 Roosevelt expected that his party would lose several races in the 1934 Congressional elections, as the presidents party had done in most previous midterm elections, but the Democrats picked up seats in both houses of Congress. Empowered by the publics apparent vote of confidence in his administration, the first item on Roosevelts agenda in the 74th Congress was the creation of a social insurance program. The Social Security Act established Social Security and promised economic security for the elderly, the poor and the sick. Roosevelt insisted that it should be funded by payroll taxes rather than from the general fund, saying, We put those payroll contributions there so as to give the contributors a legal, moral, and political right to collect their pensions and unemployment benefits. With those taxes in there, no damn politician can ever scrap my social security program.Social Security History. Ssa.gov. Retrieved on 20130714. Compared with the social security systems in western European countries, the Social Security Act of 1935 was rather conservative. But for the first time the federal government took responsibility for the economic security of the aged, the temporarily unemployed, dependent children, and the handicapped. Against Roosevelts original intention for universal coverage, the act only applied to roughly sixty percent of the labor force, as farmers, domestic workers, and other groups were excluded. Roosevelt consolidated the various relief organizations, though some, like the PWA, continued to exist. After winning Congressional authorization for further funding of relief efforts, Roosevelt established the Works Progress Administration . Under the leadership of Harry Hopkins, the WPA employed over three million people in its first year of existence. The WPA undertook numerous construction projects but also provided funding to the National Youth Administration and arts organizations. Senator Robert Wagner wrote the National Labor Relations Act, which guaranteed workers the rights to collective bargaining through unions of their own choice. The act also established the National Labor Relations Board to facilitate wage agreements and to suppress the repeated labor disturbances. The Wagner Act did not compel employers to reach agreement with their employees, but it opened possibilities for American labor.Kennedy, Freedom From Fear p. 291 The result was a tremendous growth of membership in the labor unions, especially in the massproduction sector.Colin Gordon, New Deals Business, Labor, and Politics in America, 1920 1935 p. 225 When the Flint sitdown strike threatened the production of General Motors, Roosevelt broke with the precedent set by many former presidents and refused to intervene the strike ultimately led to the unionization of both General Motors and its rivals in the American automobile industry. 1936 reelection handbill for Roosevelt promoting his economic policy While the First New Deal of 1933 had broad support from most sectors, the Second New Deal challenged the business community. Conservative Democrats, led by Al Smith, fought back with the American Liberty League, savagely attacking Roosevelt and equating him with Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin. But Smith overplayed his hand, and his boisterous rhetoric let Roosevelt isolate his opponents and identify them with the wealthy vested interests that opposed the New Deal, strengthening Roosevelt for the 1936 landslide. By contrast, labor unions, energized by the Wagner Act, signed up millions of new members and became a major backer of Roosevelts reelections in 1936, 1940 and 1944. Biographer James M. Burns suggests that Roosevelts policy decisions were guided more by pragmatism than ideology, and that he was like the general of a guerrilla army whose columns, fighting blindly in the mountains through dense ravines and thickets, suddenly converge, half by plan and half by coincidence, and debouch into the plain below. Roosevelt argued that such apparently haphazard methodology was necessary. The country needs and, unless I mistake its temper, the country demands bold, persistent experimentation, he wrote. It is common sense to take a method and try it if it fails, admit it frankly and try another. But above all, try something. Landslide reelection, 1936 1936 electoral vote results Though 8 million workers remained unemployed in 1936, economic conditions had improved since 1932 and Roosevelt was widely popular. An attempt by Huey Long and other individuals to organize a leftwing alternative to the Democratic Party collapsed after Longs death in 1935. Roosevelt won renomination with little opposition at the 1936 Democratic National Convention, while his allies overcame Southern resistance to permanently abolish the longestablished rule that had required Democratic presidential candidates to win the votes of twothirds of the delegates rather than a simple majority. The Republicans nominated Kansas Governor Alf Landon, a wellrespected but bland candidate whose chances were damaged by the public reemergence of the stillunpopular Herbert Hoover. While Roosevelt campaigned on his New Deal programs and continued to attack Hoover, Landon sought to win voters who approved of the goals of the New Deal but disagreed with its implementation. In the 1936 presidential election, Roosevelt and Garner won 60.8 of the vote and carried every state except Maine and Vermont. The Democratic ticket won the highest proportion of the popular vote and the electoral vote since the 1820 presidential election. Congressional Democrats also expanded their majorities, winning control of over threequarters of the seats in both houses of Congress. The election also saw the consolidation of the New Deal coalition while the Democrats lost some of their traditional allies in big business, they were replaced by groups such as organized labor and African Americans, the latter of whom voted Democratic for the first time since the Civil War. Second term The Supreme Court became Roosevelts primary domestic focus during his second term after the court overturned many of his programs, including NIRA. The more conservative members of the court upheld the principles of the Lochner era, which saw numerous economic regulations struck down on the basis of freedom of contract. Roosevelt proposed the Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937, which would have allowed him to appoint an additional Justice for each incumbent Justice over the age of 70 in 1937, there were six Supreme Court Justices over the age of 70. The size of the Court had been set at nine since the passage of the Judiciary Act of 1869, and Congress had altered the number of Justices six other times throughout U.S. history. Roosevelts court packing plan ran into intense political opposition from his own party, led by Vice President Garner, since it upset the separation of powers. A bipartisan coalition of liberals and conservatives of both parties opposed the bill, and Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes broke with precedent by publicly advocating defeat of the bill. Any chance of passing the bill ended with the death of Senate Majority Leader Joseph Taylor Robinson in July 1937, after Roosevelt had expended crucial political capital on the failed bill. Starting with the 1937 case of West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish , the court began to take a more favorable view of economic regulations. That same year, Roosevelt appointed a Supreme Court Justice for the first time, and by 1941, eight of the nine Justices were Roosevelt appointees. Of the justices on the court when Roosevelt took office, only Owen Roberts and Harlan Fiske Stone would outlast Roosevelt. After Parish , the Court shifted its focus from judicial review of economic regulations to the protection of civil liberties.Leuchtenburg, E. . The Supreme Court Reborn The Constitutional Revolution in the Age of Roosevelt. Oxford University Press. Four of Roosevelts Supreme Court appointees, Felix Frankfurter, Robert H. Jackson, Hugo Black, and William O. Douglas, would be particularly influential in reshaping the jurisprudence of the Court. With Roosevelts influence on the wane following the failure of the Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937, conservative Democrats joined with Republicans to block the implementation of further New Deal programs. Roosevelt did manage to pass some legislation, including the Housing Act of 1937, a second Agricultural Adjustment Act, and the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, which was the last major piece of New Deal legislation. The FLSA outlawed child labor, established a federal minimum wage, and required overtime pay for certain employees who work in excess of fortyhours per week. He also won passage of the Reorganization Act of 1939 and subsequently created the Executive Office of the President, making it the nerve center of the federal administrative system. When the economy began to deteriorate again in late 1937, Roosevelt asked Congress for 5billion in relief and public works funding. This managed to eventually create as many as 3.3 million WPA jobs by 1938. Projects accomplished under the WPA ranged from new federal courthouses and post offices, to facilities and infrastructure for national parks, bridges and other infrastructure across the country, and architectural surveys and archaeological excavations investments to construct facilities and preserve important resources. Beyond this, however, Roosevelt recommended to a special congressional session only a permanent national farm act, administrative reorganization, and regional planning measures, all of which were leftovers from a regular session. According to Burns, this attempt illustrated Roosevelts inability to decide on a basic economic program. Determined to overcome the opposition of conservative Democrats in Congress, Roosevelt became involved in the 1938 Democratic primaries, actively campaigning for challengers who were more supportive of New Deal reform. Roosevelt failed badly, managing to defeat only one target, a conservative Democrat from New York City. In the November 1938 elections, Democrats lost six Senate seats and 71 House seats, with losses were concentrated among proNew Deal Democrats. When Congress reconvened in 1939, Republicans under Senator Robert Taft formed a Conservative coalition with Southern Democrats, virtually ending Roosevelts ability to enact his domestic proposals. Ironically, many of these conservative Congressmen would provide crucial support for Roosevelts foreign policy before and during World War II. Foreign policy Roosevelt with Brazilian President Getlio Vargas and other dignitaries in 1936 The main foreign policy initiative of Roosevelts first term was the Good Neighbor Policy, which was a reevaluation of U.S. policy towards Latin America. The United States had frequently intervened in Latin America following the promulgation of the Monroe Doctrine in 1823, and the United States had occupied several Latin American nations in the Banana Wars that had occurred following the Spanish American War of 1898. After Roosevelt took office, he withdrew U.S. forces from Haiti and reached new treaties with Cuba and Panama, ended their status as U.S. protectorates. In December 1933, Roosevelt signed the Montevideo Convention on the Rights and Duties of States, renouncing the right to intervene unilaterally in the affairs of Latin American countries. He also normalized relations with the Soviet Union, ending the policy of nonrecognition that had prevailed in the United States since the Russian Revolution. The rejection of the Treaty of Versailles during the Wilson administration marked the dominance of isolationism in American foreign policy. Despite Roosevelts Wilsonian background, he and Secretary of State Cordell Hull acted with great care not to provoke isolationist sentiment. The isolationist movement was bolstered in the early to mid1930s by Senator Gerald Nye and others who succeeded in their effort to stop the merchants of death in the U.S. from selling arms abroad. This effort took the form of the Neutrality Acts the president asked for, but was refused, a provision to give him the discretion to allow the sale of arms to victims of aggression. In the interim, Italy under Benito Mussolini proceeded to overcome Ethiopia, and the Italians joined Nazi Germany in supporting the General Francisco Franco and the Nationalist cause in the Spanish Civil War. Focused on domestic policy, Roosevelt largely acquiesced to Congresss noninterventionist policies in the earlytomid 1930s. But when Japan invaded China in 1937, public opinion strongly favored China, and Roosevelt found various ways to assist that nation. The Roosevelts with George VI and Queen Elizabeth, sailing from Washington, D.C., to Mount Vernon, Virginia on the USS Potomac during the first U.S. visit of a reigning British monarch Under the leadership of Adolf Hitler, Germany annexed Austria in 1938, and Germany soon turned its attention to its eastern neighbors. Roosevelt made it clear that, in the event of German aggression against Czechoslovakia, the U.S. would remain neutral. After completion of the Munich Agreement and the execution of Kristallnacht, American public opinion turned against Germany, and Roosevelt began preparing for a possible war with Germany. Relying on an interventionist political coalition of Southern Democrats and businessoriented Republicans, Roosevelt oversaw the expansion U.S. airpower and war production capacity. When World War II began in September 1939 with Germanys invasion of Poland and Britain and Frances subsequent declaration of war upon Germany, Roosevelt sought ways to assist Britain and France militarily. Isolationist leaders like Charles Lindbergh and Senator William Borah successfully mobilized opposition to Roosevelts proposed repeal of the Neutrality Act, but Roosevelt won Congressional approval of the sale of arms on a cashandcarry basis. He also began a regular secret correspondence with Britains First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, in September 1939 the first of 1,700 letters and telegrams between them. Roosevelt forged a close personal relationship with Churchill, who became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in May 1940. Foreign trips of Roosevelt during his presidency The Fall of France in June 1940 shocked American opinion, and isolationist sentiment declined. In July 1940, Roosevelt appointed two interventionist Republican leaders, Henry L. Stimson and Frank Knox, as Secretaries of War and the Navy, respectively. Both parties gave support to his plans for a rapid buildup of the American military, but the isolationists warned that Roosevelt would get the nation into an unnecessary war with Germany. In July 1940, a group of Congressmen introduced a bill that would authorize the nations first peacetime draft, and with the support of the Roosevelt administration the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940 passed in September. The size of the army would increase from 189,000 men at the end of 1939 to 1.4 million men in mid1941. In September 1940, Roosevelt openly defied the Neutrality Acts by reaching the Destroyers for Bases Agreement, which, in exchange for military base rights in the British Caribbean Islands, gave 50 WWI American destroyers to Britain. Conservation and the environment Roosevelt had a lifelong interest in the environment and conservation starting with his youthful interest in forestry on his family estate. As governor and president, he launched numerous projects for conservation, in the name of protecting the environment, and providing beauty and jobs for the people. Although Roosevelt was never an outdoorsman or sportsman on Theodore Roosevelts scale, his growth of the national systems were comparable. Franklin Roosevelt created 140 national wildlife refuges and established 29 national forests and 29 national parks and monuments. He thereby achieved the vision he had set out in 1931 As president, he was active in expanding, funding, and promoting the National Park and National Forest systems. Under Roosevelt, their popularity soared, from three million visitors a year at the start of the decade to 15.5 million in 1939. The Civilian Conservation Corps enrolled 3.4 million young men and built 13,000 miles of trails, planted two billion trees, and upgraded 125,000 miles of dirt roads. Every state had its own state parks, and Roosevelt made sure that WPA and CCC projects were set up to upgrade them as well as the national systems. GNP and unemployment rates Unemployment rates Year Lebergott Darby 1929 3.2 3.2 1932 23.6 22.9 1933 24.9 20.6 1934 21.7 16.0 1935 20.1 14.2 1936 16.9 9.9 1937 14.3 9.1 1938 19.0 12.5 1939 17.2 11.3 1940 14.6 9.5 Government spending increased from 8.0 of gross national product under Hoover in 1932 to 10.2 of the GNP in 1936. The national debt as a percentage of the GNP had more than doubled under Hoover from 16 to 40 of the GNP in early 1933. It held steady at close to 40 as late as fall 1941, then grew rapidly during the war. The GNP was 34 higher in 1936 than in 1932 and 58 higher in 1940 on the eve of war. That is, the economy grew 58 from 1932 to 1940 in 8 years of peacetime, and then grew 56 from 1940 to 1945 in 5 years of wartime. Unemployment fell dramatically during Roosevelts first term. It increased in 1938 but continually declined after 1938. Total employment during Roosevelts term expanded by 18.31million jobs, with an average annual increase in jobs during his administration of 5.3. Election of 1940 Breaking with tradition In the months prior to the July 1940 Democratic National Convention, there was much speculation as to whether Roosevelt would break with longstanding tradition and run for an unprecedented third term. The twoterm tradition, although not yet enshrined in the Constitution, had been established by George Washington when he refused to run for a third term in the 1796 presidential election. Roosevelt refused to give a definitive statement as to his willingness to be a candidate again, and he even indicated to some ambitious Democrats, such as James Farley, that he would not run for a third term and that they could seek the Democratic nomination. However, as Germany swept through Western Europe and menaced the Britain in mid1940, Roosevelt decided that only he had the necessary experience and skills to see the nation safely through the Nazi threat. He was aided by the partys political bosses, who feared that no Democrat except Roosevelt could defeat Wendell Willkie, the popular Republican nominee. 1940 electoral vote results At the July 1940 Democratic Convention in Chicago, Roosevelt easily swept aside challenges from Farley and Vice President Garner, who had turned against Roosevelt in his second term because of his liberal economic and social policies. As a result, Roosevelt decided to pick a new running mate, Henry A. Wallace from Iowa, his Secretary of Agriculture and an outspoken liberal. That choice was strenuously opposed by many of the partys conservatives, who felt Wallace was too radical and eccentric in his private life to be an effective running mate. But Roosevelt insisted that without Wallace on the ticket he would decline renomination, and Wallace won the vicepresidential nomination, defeating Speaker of the House William B. Bankhead and other candidates.Richard Moe, Roosevelts Second Act The Election of 1940 and the Politics of War . A late August poll taken by Gallup found the race to be essentially tied, but Roosevelts popularity surged in September following the announcement of the Destroyers for Bases Agreement. Willkie supported much of the New Deal as well as rearmament and aid to Britain, but warned that Roosevelt would drag the country into another European war. Responding to Willkies attacks, Roosevelt promised to keep the country out of the war. Roosevelt won the 1940 election with 55 of the popular vote, 38 of the 48 states, and almost 85 of the electoral vote. Third term Leadup to the war Roosevelts third term was dominated by World War II. By 1940, rearmament was in high gear, partly to expand and reequip the Army and Navy and partly to become the Arsenal of Democracy for Britain and other countries. With his famous Four Freedoms speech in January 1941, Roosevelt laid out the case for an American defense of basic rights throughout the world. Assisted by Willkie, Roosevelt won Congressional approval of the LendLease program, which directed massive military and economic aid to Britain and China. In sharp contrast to the loans of World War I, there would be no repayment after the war. As Roosevelt took a firmer stance against the Axis Powers of Japan, Germany, and Italy, American isolationists such as Charles Lindbergh and the America First Committee vehemently attacked Roosevelt as an irresponsible warmonger. When Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, Roosevelt agreed to extend LendLease to the Soviets. Thus, Roosevelt had committed the U.S. to the Allied side with a policy of all aid short of war. In August 1941, Roosevelt and Churchill conducted a highly secret bilateral meeting in which they drafted the Atlantic Charter, conceptually outlining global wartime and postwar goals. This would be the first of several wartime conferences Churchill and Roosevelt would meet ten more times in person. Though Churchill pressed for an American declaration of war against Germany, Roosevelt believed that Congress would reject any attempt to bring the United States into the war. In September, a German submarine fired on the U.S. destroyer Greer, and Roosevelt declared that the U.S. Navy would assume an escort role for Allied convoys in the Atlantic as far east as Great Britain and would fire upon German ships or submarines of the Kriegsmarine if they entered the U.S. Navy zone. This shoot on sight policy effectively declared naval war on Germany and was favored by Americans by a margin of 2to1. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill aboard HMS Prince of Wales for 1941 Atlantic Charter meeting Pearl Harbor and declarations of war After the German invasion of Poland, the primary concern of both Roosevelt and his top military staff was on the war in Europe, but Japan also presented foreign policy challenges. Relations with Japan had continually deteriorated since its invasion of Manchuria in 1931, and they had further worsened with Roosevelts support of China in the Second SinoJapanese War. With the war in Europe occupying the attention of the major colonial powers, Japanese leaders eyed vulnerable colonies such as the Dutch East Indies, French Indochina, and British Malaya. After Roosevelt announced a 100 million loan to China in reaction to Japans occupation of northern French Indochina, Japan signed the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy. The pact bound each country to defend the other against attack, and Germany, Japan, and Italy became known as the Axis powers. Overcoming those who favored invading the Soviet Union, the Japanese Army high command successfully advocated for the conquest of Southeast Asia to ensure continued access to raw materials. In July 1941, after Japan occupied the remainder of French Indochina, Roosevelt cut off the sale of oil to Japan, depriving Japan of more than 95 percent of its oil supply. He also placed the Philippine military under American command and recalled General Douglas MacArthur into active duty to command U.S. forces on the Philippines. The Japanese were incensed by the embargo and Japanese leaders became determined to attack the United States unless it lifted the embargo. The Roosevelt administration was unwilling to reverse policy, and Secretary of State Hull blocked a potential summit between Roosevelt and Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe. After diplomatic efforts to end the embargo failed, the Privy Council of Japan authorized a strike against the United States. The Japanese believed that the destruction of the United States Asiatic Fleet United States Pacific Fleet was vital to the conquest of Southeast Asia. On the morning of December 7, 1941, the Japanese struck the U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor with a surprise attack, knocking out the main American battleship fleet and killing 2,403 American servicemen and civilians. At the same time, separate Japanese task forces attacked Thailand, British Hong Kong, the Philippines, and other targets. Roosevelt called for war in his famous Infamy Speech to Congress, in which he said Yesterday, December 7, 1941 a date which will live in infamy the United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan. In a nearlyunanimous vote, Congress declared war on Japan. After the Japanese attack at Pearl Harbor, antiwar sentiment in the United States largely evaporated overnight. On December 11, 1941, Hitler and Mussolini declared war on the United States, which responded in kind. A majority of scholars have rejected the conspiracy theories that Roosevelt, or any other high government officials, knew in advance about the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The Japanese had kept their secrets closely guarded. Senior American officials were aware that war was imminent, but they did not expect an attack on Pearl Harbor. Roosevelt had expected that the Japanese would attack either the Dutch East Indies or Thailand. War plans The Allies and the Axis Powers in June 1942 In late December 1941 Churchill and Roosevelt met at the Arcadia Conference, which established a joint strategy between the U.S. and Britain. Both agreed on a Europe first strategy that would prioritize the defeat of Germany before Japan. The U.S. and Britain established the Combined Chiefs of Staff to coordinate military policy and the Combined Munitions Assignments Board to coordinate the allocation of supplies. An agreement was also reached to establish a centralized command in the Pacific theater called ABDA, named for the American, British, Dutch, and Australian forces in the theater. On January 1, 1942, the United States, Britain, China, the Soviet Union, and twentytwo other countries issued the Declaration by United Nations, in which each nation pledged to defeat the Axis powers. These countries opposed to the Axis would be known as the Allied Powers. In 1942, Roosevelt formed a new body, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which made the final decisions on American military strategy. Admiral Ernest J. King as Chief of Naval Operations commanded the Navy and Marines, while General George C. Marshall led the Army and was in nominal control of the Air Force, which in practice was commanded by General Hap Arnold. The Joint Chiefs were chaired by Admiral William D. Leahy, the most senior officer in the military. Roosevelt avoided micromanaging the war and let his top military officers make most decisions. Roosevelts civilian appointees handled the draft and procurement of men and equipment, but no civilians not even the secretaries of War or Navy, had a voice in strategy. Roosevelt avoided the State Department and conducted high level diplomacy through his aides, especially Harry Hopkins, whose influence was bolstered by his control of the Lend Lease funds. Wartime conferences Roosevelt coined the term Four Policemen to refer the Big Four Allied powers of World War II, the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and China. The Big Three of Roosevelt, Churchill, and Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, together with Chinese Generalissimo Chiang Kaishek, cooperated informally on a plan in which American and British troops concentrated in the West Soviet troops fought on the Eastern front and Chinese, British and American troops fought in Asia and the Pacific. The United States also continued to send aid via the LendLease program to the Soviet Union and other countries. The Allies formulated strategy in a series of highprofile conferences as well as contact through diplomatic and military channels. Beginning in May 1942, the Soviets urged an AngloAmerican invasion of Germanoccupied France in order to divert troops from the Eastern front. Concerned that their forces were not yet ready for an invasion of France, Churchill and Roosevelt decided to delay such an invasion until at least 1943 and instead focus on a landing in North Africa, known as Operation Torch. In late 1943, Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin agreed to meet to discuss strategy and postwar plans, and at the Tehran Conference, Roosevelt met with Stalin for the first time. At the conference, Britain and the United States committed to opening a second front against Germany in 1944, while Stalin committed to entering the war against Japan at an unspecified date. Subsequent conferences at Bretton Woods and Dumbarton Oaks established the framework for the postwar international monetary system and the United Nations, an intergovernmental organization similar to Wilsons failed League of Nations. Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin met for a second time at the February 1945 Yalta Conference. With the end of the war in Europe approaching, Roosevelts primary focus was on convincing Stalin to enter the war against Japan the Joint Chiefs had estimated that an American invasion of Japan would cause as many as one million American casualties. In return for the Soviet Unions entrance into the war against Japan, the Soviet Union was promised control of Asian territories such as Sakhalin Island. The three leaders agreed to hold a conference in 1945 to establish the United Nations, and they also agreed on the structure of the United Nations Security Council, which would be charged with ensuring international peace and security. Roosevelt did not push for the immediate evacuation of Soviet soldiers from Poland, but he won the issuance of the Declaration on Liberated Europe, which promised free elections in countries that had been occupied by Germany. Germany itself would not be dismembered, but would be jointlyoccupied by the United States, France, Britain, and the Soviet Union. Against Soviet pressure, Roosevelt and Churchill refused to consent to imposing huge reparations and deindustrialization on Germany after the war. Roosevelts role in the Yalta Conference has been controversial critics charge that he naively trusted the Soviet Union to allow free elections in Eastern Europe, while supporters argue that there was little more that Roosevelt could have done for the Eastern European countries given the Soviet occupation and the need for cooperation with the Soviet Union during and after the war. Course of the war The Allies invaded French North Africa in November 1942, securing the surrender of Vichy French forces within days of landing. At the January 1943 Casablanca Conference, the Allies agreed to defeat Axis forces in North Africa and then launch an invasion of Sicily, with an attack on France to take place in 1944. At the conference, Roosevelt also announced that he would only accept the unconditional surrender of Germany, Japan, and Italy. In February 1943, the Soviet Union won a major victory at the Battle of Stalingrad, and in May 1943, the Allies secured the surrender of over 250,000 German and Italian soldiers in North Africa, ending the North African Campaign. The Allies launched an invasion of Sicily in July 1943, capturing the island by the end of the following month. In September 1943, the Allies secured an armistice from Italian Prime Minister Pietro Badoglio, but Germany quickly restored Mussolini to power. The Allied invasion of mainland Italy commenced in September 1943, but the Italian Campaign continued until 1945 as German and Italian troops resisted the Allied advance. The Allies and the Axis Powers in December 1944 To command the invasion of France, Roosevelt chose General Dwight D. Eisenhower, who had successfully commanded a multinational coalition in North Africa and Sicily. Eisenhower chose to commence Operation Overlord on June 6, 1944. Supported by 12,000 aircraft and the largest naval force ever assembled, the Allies successfully established a beachhead in Normandy and then advanced further into France. Though reluctant to back an unelected government, Roosevelt recognized Charles de Gaulles Provisional Government of the French Republic as the de facto government of France in July 1944. After most of France had been liberated from German occupation, Roosevelt granted formal recognition to de Gaulles government in October 1944. Over the following months, the Allies liberated more territory from Nazi occupation and began the invasion of Germany. By April 1945, Nazi resistance was crumbling in the face of advances by both the Western Allies and the Soviet Union. In the opening weeks of the war, Japan conquered the Philippines and the British and Dutch colonies in Southeast Asia. The Japanese advance reached its maximum extent by June 1942, when the U.S. Navy scored a decisive victory at the Battle of Midway. American and Australian forces then began a slow and costly progress called island hopping or leapfrogging through the Pacific Islands, with the objective of gaining bases from which strategic airpower could be brought to bear on Japan and from which Japan could ultimately be invaded. In contrast to Hitler, Roosevelt took no direct part in the tactical naval operations, though he approved strategic decisions. Roosevelt gave way in part to insistent demands from the public and Congress that more effort be devoted against Japan he always insisted on Germany first. The strength of the Japanese navy was decimated in the Battle of Leyte Gulf, and by April 1945 the Allies had recaptured much of their lost territory in the Pacific. Home front The home front was subject to dynamic social changes throughout the war, though domestic issues were no longer Roosevelts most urgent policy concern. The military buildup spurred economic growth. Unemployment fell in half from 7.7 million in spring 1940 to 3.4 million in fall 1941 and fell in half again to 1.5 million in fall 1942, out of a labor force of 54 million. There was a growing labor shortage, accelerating the second wave of the Great Migration of African Americans, farmers and rural populations to manufacturing centers. African Americans from the South went to California and other West Coast states for new jobs in the defense industry. To pay for increased government spending, in 1941 Roosevelt proposed that Congress enact an income tax rate of 99.5 on all income over 100,000 when the proposal failed, he issued an executive order imposing an income tax of 100 on income over 25,000, which Congress rescinded. The Revenue Act of 1942 instituted top tax rates as high as 94 , greatly increased the tax base, and instituted the first federal withholding tax. In 1944, Roosevelt requested that Congress enact legislation which would tax all unreasonable profits, both corporate and individual, and thereby support his declared need for over 10 billion in revenue for the war and other government measures. Congress overrode Roosevelts veto to pass a smaller revenue bill raising 2 billion. In 1942, with the United States now in the conflict, war production increased dramatically, but fell short of the goals established by the president, due in part to manpower shortages. The effort was also hindered by numerous strikes, especially among union workers in the coal mining and railroad industries, which lasted well into 1944. Nonetheless, between 1941 and 1945, the United States produced 2.4 million trucks, 300,000 military aircraft, 88,400 tanks, and 40 billion rounds of ammunition. The production capacity of the United States dwarfed that of other countries for example, in 1944, the United States produced more military aircraft than the combined production of Germany, Japan, Britain, and the Soviet Union. The White House became the ultimate site for labor mediation, conciliation or arbitration. One particular battle royale occurred between Vice President Wallace, who headed the Board of Economic Warfare, and Jesse H. Jones, in charge of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation both agencies assumed responsibility for acquisition of rubber supplies and came to loggerheads over funding. Roosevelt resolved the dispute by dissolving both agencies. In 1943, Roosevelt established the Office of War Mobilization to oversee the home front the agency was led by James F. Byrnes, who came to be known as the assistant president due to his influence. Roosevelt announced the plan for a bill of social and economic rights in the State of the Union address broadcast on January 11, 1944. Roosevelts 1944 State of the Union Address advocated that Americans should think of basic economic rights as a Second Bill of Rights. In his most ambitious domestic proposal of his third term, Roosevelt proposed the G.I. Bill, which would create a massive benefits program for returning soldiers. Benefits included postsecondary education, medical care, unemployment insurance, job counseling, and lowcost loans for homes and businesses. The G.I. Bill passed unanimously in both houses of Congress and was signed into law in June 1944. Of the fifteen million Americans who served in World War II, more than half would benefit from the educational opportunities provided for in the G.I. Bill. Nuclear program In August 1939, Leo Szilard and Albert Einstein sent the Einstein Szilrd letter to Roosevelt, warning of the possibility of a German project to develop nuclear weapons. Szilard realized that the recently discovered process of nuclear fission could be used to create a nuclear chain reaction that could be used as a weapon of mass destruction. Roosevelt feared the consequences of allowing Germany to have sole possession of the technology, and authorized preliminary research into nuclear weapons. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, the Roosevelt administration secured the funds needed to continue research and selected General Leslie Groves to oversee the Manhattan Project, which was charged with developing the first nuclear weapons. Roosevelt and Churchill agreed to jointly pursue the project, and Roosevelt helped ensure that American scientists cooperated with their British counterparts. In August 1945, the United States would drop nuclear weapons on two major Japanese cities, and Japan would surrender to the Allies in September 1945. Declining health Roosevelt, a chainsmoker throughout his entire adult life, had been in declining physical health since at least 1940, and by 1944 he was noticeably fatigued. In March 1944, shortly after his 62nd birthday, he underwent testing at Bethesda Hospital and was found to have high blood pressure, atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease causing angina pectoris, and congestive heart failure. Hospital physicians and two outside specialists ordered Roosevelt to rest. His personal physician, Admiral Ross McIntire, created a daily schedule that banned business guests for lunch and incorporated two hours of rest each day. During the 1944 reelection campaign, McIntire denied several times that Roosevelts health was poor on October 12, for example, he announced that The Presidents health is perfectly OK. There are absolutely no organic difficulties at all. Prior to the election, Roosevelt may have used his authority over the Office of Censorship to quash press reports of his declining physical health. Election of 1944 1944 electoral vote results While some Democrats had opposed Roosevelts nomination in 1940, the president faced little difficulty in securing his renomination at the 1944 Democratic National Convention. Roosevelt made it clear before the convention that he was seeking another term, and on the lone presidential ballot of the convention Roosevelt won the vast majority of delegates, although a minority of Southern Democrats voted for Harry F. Byrd. Party leaders prevailed upon Roosevelt to drop Vice President Wallace from the ticket, believing him to be an electoral liability and a poor potential successor in case of Rooseveltd death. Roosevelt preferred Byrnes as Wallaces replacement but was convinced to support Senator Harry S. Truman of Missouri, who had earned renown for his investigation of inefficiency and was acceptable to the various factions of the party. On the second vice presidential ballot of the convention, Truman defeated Wallace to win the nomination. The Republicans nominated Thomas E. Dewey, the governor of New York who had a reputation as a liberal in his party. The opposition lambasted Roosevelt and his administration for domestic corruption, bureaucratic inefficiency, tolerance of Communism, and military blunders. Labor unions, which had grown rapidly in the war, threw their allout support behind Roosevelt. Roosevelt and Truman won the 1944 election by a comfortable margin, defeating Dewey and his running mate John W. Bricker with 53.4 of the popular vote and 432 out of the 531 electoral votes. The president campaigned in favor of a strong United Nations, so his victory symbolized support for the nations future participation in the international community. Fourth term and death When Roosevelt returned to the United States from the Yalta Conference, many were shocked to see how old, thin and frail he looked. He spoke while seated in the well of the House, an unprecedented concession to his physical incapacity. During March 1945, he sent strongly worded messages to Stalin accusing him of breaking his Yalta commitments over Poland, Germany, prisoners of war and other issues. When Stalin accused the western Allies of plotting behind his back a separate peace with Hitler, Roosevelt replied I cannot avoid a feeling of bitter resentment towards your informers, whoever they are, for such vile misrepresentations of my actions or those of my trusted subordinates. On March 29, 1945, Roosevelt went to the Little White House at Warm Springs, to rest before his anticipated appearance at the founding conference of the United Nations. On the afternoon of April 12, Roosevelt said, I have a terrific pain in the back of my head. He then slumped forward in his chair, unconscious, and was carried into his bedroom. The presidents attending cardiologist, Dr. Howard Bruenn, diagnosed the medical emergency as a massive cerebral hemorrhage. At 335p.m. that day, Roosevelt died. As Allen Drury later said, so ended an era, and so began another. After Roosevelts death, an editorial by The New York Times declared, Men will thank God on their knees a hundred years from now that Franklin D. Roosevelt was in the White House. On the morning of April 13, Roosevelts body was placed in a flagdraped coffin and loaded onto the presidential train for the trip back to Washington. Along the route, thousands flocked to the tracks to pay their respects. After a White House funeral on April 14, Roosevelt was transported by train from Washington, D.C., to his place of birth at Hyde Park. As was his wish, Roosevelt was buried on April 15 in the Rose Garden of his Springwood estate. Eleanor would be interred next to him when she died seventeen years later in November 1962. Roosevelts declining physical health had been kept secret from the general public. His death was met with shock and grief across the U.S. and around the world. President Truman dedicated Victory in Europe Day and its celebrations to Roosevelts memory, and kept the flags across the U.S. at halfstaff for the remainder of the 30day mourning period, saying that his only wish was that Franklin D. Roosevelt had lived to witness this day. World War II finally ended with the Surrender of Japan in September 1945. Truman would preside over the demobilization of the war effort and the establishment of the United Nations and other postwar institutions envisioned during Roosevelts presidency. Civil rights, internment, and the Holocaust Roosevelt was a hero to major minority groups, especially African Americans, Catholics, and Jews, and was highly successful in attracting large majorities of these voters into his New Deal coalition. He won strong support from Chinese Americans and Filipino Americans, but not Japanese Americans, as he presided over their internship in concentration camps during the war. African Americans and Native Americans fared well in two New Deal relief programs, the Civilian Conservation Corps and the Indian Reorganization Act, respectively. Sitkoff reported that the WPA provided an economic floor for the whole black community in the 1930s, rivaling both agriculture and domestic service as the chief source of income. However, Roosevelt needed the support of the powerful white Southern Democrats for his New Deal programs, and blacks were still disenfranchised in the South. He decided against pushing for federal antilynching legislation. It was not likely to pass and the political fight might threaten his ability to pass his highest priority programs though he did denounce lynchings as a vile form of collective murder. Eleanor Roosevelt and Mary McLeod Bethune, a member of Roosevelts Black Cabinet In 1941, Roosevelt established the Fair Employment Practices Committee to implement Executive Order 8802, which prohibited racial and religious discrimination in employment among defense contractors. This was the first national program directed against employment discrimination. African Americans who gained defense industry jobs in the 1940s shared in the higher wages in the 1950s they had gained in relative economic position, about 14 higher than other blacks who were not in such industries. Their moves into manufacturing positions were critical to their success. The issue of desegregating the armed forces did not arise, but in 1940 Roosevelt appointed former federal judge William H. Hastie, an African American, to be a civilian aide to Secretary of War Henry Stimson. The attack on Pearl Harbor raised concerns in the public regarding the possibility of sabotage by Japanese Americans. This suspicion was fed by longstanding racism against Japanese immigrants, as well as the findings of the Roberts Commission, which concluded that the attack on Pearl Harbor had been assisted by JapaneseAmericans. On February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066, which relocated hundreds of thousands of the JapaneseAmerican citizens and immigrants. They were forced to liquidate their properties and businesses and interned in hastily built camps in interior, harsh locations. Distracted by other issues, Roosevelt had delegated the decision for internment to Secretary of War Stimson, who in turn relied on the judgment of Assistant Secretary of War John J. McCloy. The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the executive order in the 1944 case of Korematsu v. United States . Many German and Italian citizens were also arrested or placed into internment camps. After Kristallnacht in 1938, Roosevelt helped expedite Jewish immigration from Germany and allowed Austrian and German citizens already in the United States to stay indefinitely. He was prevented from accepting more Jewish immigrants by the restrictive Immigration Act of 1924, the prevalence of nativism and antisemitism among voters and members of Congress, and some resistance in the American Jewish community to the acceptance of Eastern European Jewish immigrants. Hitler chose to implement the Final Solution the extermination of Jewish population in January 1942, and American officials learned of the scale of the Nazi extermination campaign in the following months. Against the objections of the State Department, Roosevelt convinced the other Allied leaders to jointly issue the Joint Declaration by Members of the United Nations, which condemned the ongoing Holocaust and promised to try its perpetrators as war criminals. In January 1944, Roosevelt established the War Refugee Board to aid Jews and other victims of Axis atrocities. Aside from these actions, Roosevelt believed that the best way to help the persecuted populations of Europe was to end the war as quickly as possible. Top military leaders and War Department leaders rejected any campaign to bomb the extermination camps or the rail lines leading to the camps, fearing it would be a diversion from the war effort. According to biographer Jean Edward Smith there is no evidence that anyone ever proposed such a campaign to Roosevelt himself. Criticism During his presidency, and continuing to a lesser extent today, there has been much criticism of Roosevelt, some of it intense. Critics have questioned not only his policies, positions, and the consolidation of power that occurred due to his responses to the crises of the Depression and World War II, but also his breaking with tradition by running for a third term as president.George Wolfskill and John Allen Hudson. All But the People Franklin D. Roosevelt and His Critics, 1933 39 By the middle of his second term, much criticism of Roosevelt centered on fears that he was heading toward a dictatorship, by attempting to seize control of the Supreme Court with the courtpacking plan, by attempting to eliminate dissent within the Democratic party in the South during the 1938 elections, and by breaking the tradition established by Washington of not seeking a third term. As two historians explain, In 1940, with the twoterm issue as a weapon, antiNew Dealers...argued that the time had come to disarm the dictator and to dismantle the machinery.Herbert S. Parmet and Marie B. Hecht. Never Again A President Runs for a Third Term , p. x. As president, Roosevelt was hit from both the right and the left. He came under attack for his supposed antibusiness policies, for being a warmonger, for being a Fascist and for being too friendly to Joseph Stalin. Long after his death, new lines of attack criticized his policies regarding helping the Jews of Europe, incarcerating the Japanese on the West Coast,Greg Robinson, A Tragedy of Democracy Japanese Confinement in North America and opposing antilynching legislation.Ira Katznelson, Fear Itself The New Deal and the Origins of Our Time Legacy and memorials A majority of polls of historians and political scientists rank Roosevelt as the second or third greatest president. He is widely considered to be one of the most important figures in the history of the United States, as well as one of the most influential figures of the 20th century. The rapid expansion of government programs that occurred during Roosevelts term redefined the role of the government in the United States, and Roosevelts advocacy of government social programs was instrumental in redefining liberalism for coming generations. Roosevelt firmly established the United States leadership role on the world stage, with his role in shaping and financing World War II. His isolationist critics faded away, and even the Republicans joined in his overall policies. He also created a new understanding of the presidency, permanently increasing the power of the president at the expense of Congress. After his death, his widow, Eleanor, continued to be a forceful presence in US and world politics, serving as delegate to the conference which established the United Nations and championing civil rights and liberalism generally. Many members of his administration played leading roles in the administrations of Truman, Kennedy and Johnson, each of whom embraced Roosevelts political legacy. Reflecting on Roosevelts presidency, which brought the United States through the Great Depression and World War II to a prosperous future, said FDRs biographer Jean Edward Smith in 2007, He lifted himself from a wheelchair to lift the nation from its knees. Roosevelts home in Hyde Park is now a National Historic Site and home to his Presidential library. Washington D.C., hosts two memorials to the former president. The largest, the 7.50acre Roosevelt Memorial, is located next to the Jefferson Memorial on the Tidal Basin and was dedicated by Bill Clinton in 1997. A much more modest memorial, a block of marble in front of the National Archives building, was erected in 1965. Roosevelts leadership in the March of Dimes is one reason he is commemorated on the American dime. Roosevelt was honored by the United States Postal Service with a Prominent Americans series 6 postage stamp, issue of 1966. He also appears on several other U.S. Postage stamps. See also Collection of video clips of Roosevelt Notes References Bibliography Biographical . despite the title, a highly favorable biography by scholar. Plus Author Webcast Interview at the Pritzker Military Library on January 22, 2009 . . . the most detailed scholarly biography ends in 1934. Frank Freidel, Franlkin D. Roosevelt The Apprenticeship to 1918 online Frank Freidel, Franklin D. Roosevelt The Ordeal , covers 1919 to 1928 online Frank Freidel, Franklin D. Roosevelt The Triumph covers 192932 online covers entire life. popular joint biography . . . 35 essays by scholars. online covers 1905 32. Scholarly topical studies . 200 pp overview by leading British scholar. . On his environmental and conservation beliefs policies. . . . . . . , on 1940 election. , 768 pages essays by scholars covering major historiographical themes. online , balanced summary . . , the classic narrative history. Strongly supports FDR. . . Foreign policy and World War II . , 253 pp. 514 pp. . Kaiser, David. No End Save Victory How FDR Led the Nation into War excerpt and text search . . The Undeclared War, 1940 1941 . highly detailed and influential twovolume semiofficial history Mayers, David. FDRs Ambassadors and the Diplomacy of Crisis From the Rise of Hitler to the End of World War II . Detailed history of how FDR handled the war. , Pulitzer Prize. . Overall history of the war strong on diplomacy of FDR and other main leaders. . Criticism . A revisionist blames FDR for inciting Japan to attack. summarizes newspaper editorials. criticizes intellectuals who supported FDR. , 433 pp. , critique from the left. . 248 pp. . , former FDR supporter condemns all aspects of FDR. . , says US should have let USSR and Germany destroy each other. . . says FDRs racism was primarily to blame. , compares populist and paternalist features. by libertarian economist who blames both Hoover and FDR. . Attacks Roosevelt for passive complicity in allowing Holocaust to happen. FDRs rhetoric . . . . . . . . . . Historiography Hendrickson, Jr., Kenneth E. FDR Biographies, in William D. Pederson, ed. A Companion to Franklin D. Roosevelt pp 1 14 online Provizer, Norman W. Eleanor Roosevelt Biographies, in William D. Pederson, ed. A Companion to Franklin D. Roosevelt pp 15 33 online Primary sources full of useful data . , massive compilation of many public opinion polls from the USA. , 3 vol, summarizes results of each poll as reported to newspapers. . by key Brain Truster , covers 1933 37. 2nd series 1937 39 available on microfiche and in a 14 vol print edition at some academic libraries. . . . The Documentary History of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidency table of contents External links White House biography Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial, Washington, DC Full text and audio of a number of Roosevelts speeches Miller Center of Public Affairs Finding Aid to Franklin Delano Roosevelt Collection, 19141945 at the New York State Library, accessed May 18, 2016. Franklin Delano Roosevelt A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Life Portrait of Franklin D. Roosevelt, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , October 11, 1999 Franklin D Roosevelt The man who conquered fear by The Independents Max Hastings on 19 January 19, 2009. Archived from the original on August 6, 2014. The Presidents FDR an American Experience documentary Franklin D. Roosevelt Personal Manuscripts FDRs Ties to Georgia from the Digital Library of Georgia Category1882 births Category1945 deaths Category19thcentury American Episcopalians Category20thcentury American Episcopalians Category20thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican antifascists CategoryAmerican Episcopalians CategoryAmerican Odd Fellows CategoryAmerican people in the Venona papers CategoryAmerican people of Dutch descent CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of French descent CategoryAmerican Philatelic Society CategoryAmerican philatelists CategoryAmerican politicians with physical disabilities CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryBulloch family CategoryBurials in New York CategoryColumbia Law School alumni CategoryDelano family CategoryDemocratic Party vice presidential nominees CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party state governors of the United States CategoryDutchess County, New York politicians CategoryEleanor Roosevelt CategoryFreemen of the City of London CategoryGovernors of New York CategoryGroton School alumni CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryThe Harvard Crimson people CategoryKnights Grand Cross of the Military Order of William CategoryLivingston family CategoryNew York Democrats CategoryNew York State Senators CategoryPeople associated with the New Deal CategoryPeople from Hyde Park, New York CategoryPoliticians with paraplegia CategoryPeople with poliomyelitis CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryPresidents of the United States who died while in office Franklin CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryU.S. Synthetic Rubber Program CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1932 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1936 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1940 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1944 CategoryUnited States Assistant Secretaries of the Navy CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1920 CategoryWorld War II politicalleaders
George Herbert Walker Bush is an American politician who served as the 41st President of the United States from 1989 to 1993. Prior to assuming the presidency, he was the 43rd Vice President of the United States from 1981 to 1989. A member of the Republican Party, he was previously a congressman, ambassador and Director of Central Intelligence. He is the oldest living former U.S. President and Vice President. He was previously known simply as George Bush since 2001, he has often been referred to as George H. W. Bush, Bush the Elder or George Bush Senior to distinguish him from his eldest son, George W. Bush, the 43rd President of the United States. A member of the Bush family, Bush was born in Milton, Massachusetts to Prescott Bush and Dorothy Walker Bush . Following the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, Bush postponed his university studies, enlisted in the U.S. Navy on his 18th birthday, and became the youngest aviator in the U.S. Navy at the time. He served until the end of the war, then attended Yale University. Graduating in 1948, he moved his family to West Texas, where he entered the oil business and became a millionaire by the age of 40 in 1964. Bush became involved in politics soon after founding his own oil company, and he won election to the House of Representatives in 1966. In 1971, President Richard Nixon appointed Bush as Ambassador to the United Nations, and in 1973, Bush became the Chairman of the Republican National Committee. The following year, President Gerald Ford appointed Bush as the ambassador to the Peoples Republic of China, and later reassigned Bush to the position of Director of Central Intelligence. Bush ran for president in 1980 but was defeated in the Republican primary by Ronald Reagan. Reagan chose Bush as his running mate, and Bush became vice president after the Reagan Bush ticket won the 1980 election. During his eightyear tenure as vice president, Bush headed administration task forces on deregulation and fighting the War on Drugs. In 1988, Bush ran a successful campaign to succeed Reagan as President, defeating Democratic opponent Michael Dukakis. Foreign policy drove the Bush presidency military operations were conducted in Panama and the Persian Gulf the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, and the Soviet Union dissolved two years later. Though the agreement was not ratified until after he left office, Bush also signed the North American Free Trade Agreement, which created a trade bloc consisting of the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Domestically, Bush reneged on a 1988 campaign promise and, after a struggle with Congress, signed an increase in taxes that Congress had passed. In the wake of a weak recovery from an economic recession, along with continuing budget deficits and the diminution of foreign politics as a major issue in a postCold War political climate, he lost the 1992 presidential election to Democrat Bill Clinton. Bush left office in 1993. His presidential library was dedicated in 1997, and he has been active often alongside Bill Clinton in various humanitarian activities. With George W. Bushs victory in the 2000 presidential election, Bush and his son became the second fatherson combination to serve as president, following John Adams and John Quincy Adams. Bushs second son Jeb Bush, served as the 43rd Governor of Florida and unsuccessfully sought the Republican presidential nomination in 2016. Early life and education Young George H. W. Bush taking his first steps in Kennebunkport, Maine, c. 1925 George Herbert Walker Bush was born at 173 Adams Street in Milton, Massachusetts, on June 12, 1924, to Prescott Sheldon Bush and Dorothy Bush. The Bush family moved from Milton to Greenwich, Connecticut, shortly after his birth. Growing up, he used the nickname Poppy. Bush began his formal education at the Greenwich Country Day School in Greenwich. Beginning in 1938, he attended Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, where he held a number of leadership positions including president of the senior class, secretary of the student council, president of the community fundraising group, a member of the editorial board of the school newspaper, and captain of both the varsity baseball and soccer teams. World War II Being rescued by the submarine USS Finback The United States was drawn into World War II when the Empire of Japan attacked Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. Six months later, Bush enlisted into the US. Navy immediately after graduating from Phillips Academy on his eighteenth birthday. He became a naval aviator. After completing the 10month course, he was commissioned as an ensign in the United States Naval Reserve at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi on June 9, 1943 , which made him the youngest naval aviator to that date. In September 1943, he was assigned to Torpedo Squadron as the photographic officer. The following year, his squadron was based on as a member of Air Group 51, where his lanky physique earned him the nickname Skin. During this time, the task force was victorious in one of the largest air battles of World War II the Battle of the Philippine Sea. After Bushs promotion to Lieutenant on August 1, 1944, San Jacinto commenced operations against the Japanese in the Bonin Islands. Bush piloted one of four Grumman TBM Avenger aircraft from VT51 that attacked the Japanese installations on Chichijima.Story of George H. W. Bush World War II Experience. CNN. December 20, 2003. His crew for the mission, which occurred on September 2, 1944, included Radioman Second Class John Delaney and Lieutenant Junior Grade William White. During their attack, the Avengers encountered intense antiaircraft fire Bushs aircraft was hit by flak and his engine caught on fire. Despite the fire in his aircraft, Bush completed his attack and released bombs over his target, scoring several damaging hits. With his engine ablaze, Bush flew several miles from the island, where he and one other crew member on the TBM Avenger bailed out of the aircraft the other mans parachute did not open. Bush waited for four hours in an inflated raft, while several fighters circled protectively overhead until he was rescued by the lifeguard submarine . For the next month, he remained on Finback and participated in the rescue of other pilots. Several of those shot down during the attack were executed, and their livers were eaten by their captors in a disgusting display of cannibalism. George Bush in his Grumman TBM Avenger on the carrier in 1944 In November 1944, Bush returned to San Jacinto and participated in operations in the Philippines until his squadron was replaced and sent home to the United States. Through 1944, he flew 58 combat missions for which he received the Distinguished Flying Cross, three Air Medals, and the Presidential Unit Citation awarded to San Jacinto . Because of his valuable combat experience, Bush was reassigned to Norfolk Navy Base and put in a training wing for new torpedo pilots. He was later assigned as a naval aviator in a new torpedo squadron, VT153, based at Naval Air Station Grosse Ile, Michigan. The unconditional surrender of Japan was announced on August 15, 1945. Bush was honorably discharged the following month. Marriage and college years George Bush married Barbara Pierce in Rye, New York on January 6, 1945, only weeks after his return from the Pacific. The couples first residence was a small rented apartment in Trenton, Michigan, near Bushs Navy assignment at NAS Grosse Ile. Their marriage produced six children George Walker Bush , Pauline Robinson Robin Bush , John Ellis Jeb Bush , Neil Mallon Pierce Bush , Marvin Pierce Bush , and Dorothy Bush Koch . Bush had been accepted to Yale University prior to his enlistment in the military, but he deferred attending the school until after his military service and marriage to Barbara Pierce. While at Yale, he was enrolled in an accelerated program that allowed him to graduate in two and a half years, rather than the usual four. He was a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity and was elected its president. He also captained the Yale baseball team, and as a lefthanded first baseman, played in the first two College World Series. As the team captain during his senior year, Bush met Babe Ruth before a game the event took place only weeks before Ruths death. Like his father, he was also a member of the Yale cheerleading squad. Late in his junior year, he was initiated into the Skull and Bones secret society his father Prescott Bush had been initiated into the same society in 1917. He graduated from Yale in 1948 as a member of the Phi Beta Kappa with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics. Business career After graduating from Yale, Bush moved his young family to West Texas. His fathers business connections proved useful as he ventured into the oil business, starting as an oil field equipment salesman for Dresser Industries, a subsidiary of Brown Brothers Harriman . While working for Dresser, Bush lived in various places with his family Odessa, Texas Ventura, Bakersfield and Compton, California and Midland, Texas. George W. Bush interview with Bob Schieffer on Face the Nation Bush started the BushOverbey Oil Development company in 1951 and in 1953 cofounded the Zapata Petroleum Corporation, an oil company that drilled in the Permian Basin in Texas. In 1954 he was named president of the Zapata Offshore Company, a subsidiary which specialized in offshore drilling. In 1959 , Bush moved the company and his family from Midland to Houston.Bush, George W. 41 A Portrait of My Father. Crown Publishers, 2014, p. 64. He continued serving as president of the company until 1964, and later chairman until 1966, but his ambitions turned political. By that time, Bush had become a millionaire. According to Time.com, Bush had a net worth of 20 million in 2015. Political career Congressional years Bush in 1969 Bush served as Chairman of the Republican Party for Harris County, Texas in 1964, but wanted to be more involved in policy making, so he set his sights high he aimed for a U.S. Senate seat from Texas. After winning the Republican primary, Bush faced his opponent, incumbent Democrat Ralph W. Yarborough, who attacked Bush as a rightwing extremist. Bush was a strong supporter of Republican Senator Barry Goldwater, who headed the Republican ticket as the presidential candidate. Like Goldwater, Bush strongly opposed civil rights legislation in the name of states rights. Yarborough, a leading Texas liberal, supported the civil rights legislation and was reelected by 56 44. The Republican candidate for governor, Jack Crichton of Dallas, who often campaigned alongside Bush before the election, lost by a much wider margin to Governor John B. Connally Jr. Bush and the Harris County Republicans played a role in the development of the new Republican Party of the late 20th century. First, Bush worked to absorb the John Birch Society members, who were trying to take over the Republican Party. Second, during and after the Civil Rights Movement, Democrats in the South who were committed to segregation left their party, and although the country club Republicans had differing ideological beliefs, they found common ground in hoping to expel the Democrats from power. Bush with President Dwight D. Eisenhower Bush was elected in 1966 to a House of Representatives seat from the 7th District of Texas, defeating with 57 percent of the ballots cast the Democrat Frank Briscoe, the district attorney of Harris County known for his law and order credentials and a cousin of later Governor Dolph Briscoe. Bush was the first Republican to represent Houston in the U.S. House. Bushs representative district included Tanglewood, the Houston neighborhood that was his residenceHickey, Elisabeth. Bushes lot No room for real estate. The Washington Times . Thursday November 19, 1992. Part E Life E1. Accessed on LexisNexis. his family had moved into Tanglewood in the 1960s. His voting record in the House was generally conservative Bush voted for the Civil Rights Act of 1968, although it was generally unpopular in his district. He supported the Nixon administrations Vietnam policies, but broke with Republicans on the issue of birth control, which he supported. Despite being a firstterm congressman, Bush was appointed to the powerful House Ways and Means Committee, where he voted to abolish the military draft. He was elected to a second term in 1968. In 1970 Nixon convinced Bush to relinquish his House seat to run for the Senate against Ralph Yarborough, a fierce Nixon critic. In the Republican primary, Bush easily defeated conservative Robert J. Morris, by a margin of 87.6 to 12.4. Nixon came to Texas to campaign in Longview for Bush and gubernatorial candidate Paul Eggers, a Dallas lawyer who was a close friend of U.S. Senator John G. Tower. Former Congressman Lloyd Bentsen, a more moderate Democrat and native of Mission in south Texas, defeated Yarborough in the Democratic primary. Yarborough endorsed Bentsen, who defeated Bush, 53.4 to 46.6. As Bushs political career waned, he moved out of Houston and sold his first Tanglewood house, but for periods of time continued to reside in Tanglewood. Ambassador to the United Nations Bush as ambassador to the United Nations, 1971 Following his 1970 loss, Bush was well known as a prominent Republican businessman from the Sun Belt, a group of states in the Southern part of the country. Nixon noticed and appreciated the sacrifice Bush had made of his Congressional position, so he appointed him Ambassador to the United Nations. He was confirmed unanimously by the Senate, and served for two years, beginning in 1971. Chairman of the Republican National Committee Amidst the Watergate scandal, Nixon asked Bush to become chairman of the Republican National Committee in 1973. Bush accepted, and held this position when the popularity of both Nixon and the Republican Party plummeted. He defended Nixon steadfastly, but later as Nixons complicity became clear, Bush focused more on defending the Republican Party, while still maintaining loyalty to Nixon. As chairman, Bush formally requested that Nixon eventually resign for the good of the Republican party. Nixon did this on August 9, 1974 Bush noted in his diary that There was an aura of sadness, like somebody died.... The resignation speech was vintage Nixon a kick or two at the press enormous strains. One couldnt help but look at the family and the whole thing and think of his accomplishments and then think of the shame.... Gerald Fords swearingin offered indeed a new spirit, a new lift. Envoy to China Bush as United States Liaison to China, circa 1975 President Gerald Ford appointed Bush to be Chief of the U.S. Liaison Office in the Peoples Republic of China. Since the United States at the time maintained official relations with the Republic of China on Taiwan and not the Peoples Republic of China, the Liaison Office did not have the official status of an embassy and Bush did not formally hold the position of ambassador, though he unofficially acted as one. The 14 months that he spent in China were largely seen as beneficial for U.S.China relations. After Ford assumed the presidency, Bush was under serious consideration for being nominated as Vice President. Ford eventually narrowed his list to Nelson Rockefeller and Bush. White House Chief of Staff Donald Rumsfeld reportedly preferred Rockefeller over Bush. Rockefeller was finally named and confirmed. Bush was again passed over for the vice presidency by Ford when the president chose Bushs future presidential rival, Senator Bob Dole, to replace Rockefeller on the 1976 presidential ticket. Director of Central Intelligence Bush, as CIA Director, listens at a meeting following the assassinations in Beirut of Francis E. Meloy, Jr. and Robert O. Waring, 1976. In 1976 Ford brought Bush back to Washington to become Director of Central Intelligence , replacing William Colby. He served in this role for 357 days, from January 30, 1976, to January 20, 1977. The CIA had been rocked by a series of revelations, including those based on investigations by the Church Committee regarding illegal and unauthorized activities by the CIA, and Bush was credited with helping to restore the agencys morale. In his capacity as DCI, Bush gave national security briefings to Jimmy Carter both as a Presidential candidate and as Presidentelect, and discussed the possibility of remaining in that position in a Carter administration, but did not do so. He was succeeded by Deputy Director of Central Intelligence E. Henry Knoche, who served as acting Director of Central Intelligence until Stansfield Turner was confirmed. Other positions After a Democratic administration took power in 1977, Bush became chairman on the Executive Committee of the First International Bank in Houston. He later spent a year as a parttime professor of Administrative Science at Rice Universitys Jones School of Business beginning in 1978, the year it opened Bush said of his time there, I loved my brief time in the world of academia. Between 1977 and 1979, he was a director of the Council on Foreign Relations foreign policy organization. 1980 presidential campaign Campaign logo Ronald Reagan, moderator John Breen, and Bush participate in the Nashua, New Hampshire Presidential Debate. Bush had decided in the late 1970s that he was going to run for president in 1980 in 1979, he attended 850 political events and traveled more than to campaign for the nations highest office. In the contest for the Republican Party nomination, Bush stressed his wide range of government experience, while competing against rivals Senator Howard Baker of Tennessee, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, Congressman John Anderson of Illinois , Congressman Phil Crane, also of Illinois, former Governor John Connally of Texas, former Minnesota Governor Harold Stassen, and the frontrunner Ronald Reagan, former actor, and Governor of California. In the primary election, Bush focused almost entirely on the Iowa caucuses, while Reagan ran a more traditional campaign. Bush represented the centrist wing in the GOP, whereas Reagan represented conservatives. Bush famously labeled Reagans supply sideinfluenced plans for massive tax cuts voodoo economics. His strategy proved useful, to some degree, as he won in Iowa with 31.5 to Reagans 29.4. After the win, Bush stated that his campaign was full of momentum, or Big Mo. As a result of the loss, Reagan replaced his campaign manager, reorganized his staff, and concentrated on the New Hampshire primary. The two men agreed to a debate in the state, organized by the Nashua Telegraph , but paid for by the Reagan campaign. Reagan invited the other four candidates as well, but Bush refused to debate them, and eventually they left. The debate proved to be a pivotal moment in the campaign when the moderator, John Breen, ordered Reagans microphone turned off, his angry response, I am paying for this microphone, struck a chord with the public. Bush ended up losing New Hampshires primary with 23 to Reagans 50. Bush lost most of the remaining primaries as well, and formally dropped out of the race in May of that year. With his political future in doubt, Bush sold his house in Houston and bought his grandfathers estate in Kennebunkport, Maine, known as Walkers Point. At the Republican Convention, Reagan selected Bush as his Vice Presidential nominee, placing him on the winning Republican presidential ticket of 1980. Vice Presidency Vice Presidential portrait First term, 1981 1985 As Vice President, Bush generally maintained a typically low profile while he recognized the constitutional limits of the office he avoided decisionmaking or criticizing Reagan in any way. As had become customary, he and his wife moved into the Vice Presidents residence at Number One Observatory Circle, about two miles from the White House. After selling the house in Tanglewood, the Bushes declared a room in The Houstonian Hotel in Houston as their official voting address. The Bushes attended a large number of public and ceremonial events in their positions, including many state funerals, which became a common joke for comedians. Mrs. Bush found the funerals largely beneficial, saying, George met with many current or future heads of state at the funerals he attended, enabling him to forge personal relationships that were important to President Reagan. As the President of the Senate, Bush stayed in contact with members of Congress and kept the president informed on occurrences on Capitol Hill. Bush with President Ronald Reagan On March 30, 1981 , Reagan was shot and seriously wounded by John Hinckley, Jr. in Washington, D.C. Bush was in Fort Worth, Texas, and immediately flew back to Washington because he was next in line to the presidency. Reagans cabinet convened in the White House Situation Room, where they discussed various issues, including the availability of the Nuclear Football. When Bushs plane landed, his aides advised him to proceed directly to the White House by helicopter, as an image of the government still functioning despite the attack. Bush rejected the idea, responding, Only the President lands on the South Lawn. This made a positive impression on Reagan, who recovered and returned to work within two weeks. From then on, the two men would have regular Thursday lunches in the Oval Office. During a Tulsa, Oklahoma Republican fundraiser in June 1981, Bush stated that President Reagan was unwilling to make additional tax cut compromises with Congress. In September 1981, Bush traveled to Mexico for participation in Independence Day celebrations there, Bush saying in a statement that President Reagan was deeply committed to strengthening the friendship and cooperation between our countries. In November 1981, Bush toured western Texas to offer support for beleaguered Director of the Office of Management and Budget David Stockman, who he believed was intelligent but needed to adjust to managing journalists. During a December 1981 interview, Bush stated that he was convinced news leaks by unnamed administration officials were correct and had succeeded in hurting President Reagan I really feel we have been undisciplined in this White House. Weve not served the president well by these leaks. On April 28, 1982, Bush met with Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew for a wideranging discussion that included speaking about regional security, the world economy, and Soviet expansionism in Southeast Asia, and later that month, Bush confirmed he was considering traveling to China during his impending trip to Asia and the Pacific amid a news conference in Seoul, South Korea. In November 1982, Bush toured Africa, the first instance of American government visiting there since the Reagan administration began. Bush told reporters that while he would allow for heads of state to dictate how each meeting would transpire, there was an expectation on his part for discussions on the independence of Namibia, adding that the US was going to retain the position of no settlement in Namibia until Cuban troops in Angola were withdrawn. On November 15, Bush met with United States Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Yuri Andropov in Moscow, Russia to discuss human rights and arms reductions. Bush later said, The meeting was frank, cordial and substantive. It gave both sides the opportunity to exchange views on the state of their relations. At the end of January 1983, Bush began a sevenday tour of West Europe intended to promote the arms reduction commitment being advocated for by the Reagan administration. During a February 8 news conference in Paris, Bush said the USs invitations for the Soviet Union to consent to a reduction in mediumrange missiles were supported by Western Europe, which he stated had also consented to the deployment of new American missiles starting in the latter part of the year. The following day, Bush defended American nuclear arms policy when answering British Secretary General of the Committee on Nuclear Disarmament Bruce Kent. In September 1983, Bush met with President of Romania Nicolae Ceauescu, insisting during the meeting that President Reagan intended to push for arms reductions at the Geneva talks with the Soviet Union. Shortly thereafter, Bush said the US wanted better relations with all countries within the East Bloc though stressed NATO would retaliate in the event of any threatening of European military stability by the Soviets, and the vice president assailed the Soviet Union for the Berlin Wall and destroying the Korean Air Lines jetliner. In December 1983 Bush flew to El Salvador and warned that countrys military leaders to end their death squads and hold fully free elections or face the loss of U.S. aid. It is not just the President, it is not just me or the Congress. If these deathsquad murders continue, you will lose the support of the American people and that would indeed be a tragedy. Bushs aides feared for his safety and thought about calling the meeting off when they discovered apparent blood stains on the floor of the presidential palace of lvaro Magaa. Bush was never told of the aides concerns and a tense meeting was held in which some of Magaas personnel brandished semiautomatic weapons and refused requests to take them outside. Bush was assigned by Reagan to chair two special task forces, on deregulation and international drug smuggling. The deregulation task force reviewed hundreds of rules, making specific recommendations on which ones to amend or revise, in order to curb the size of the federal government. The drug smuggling task force coordinated federal efforts to reduce the quantity of drugs entering the United States. Both were popular issues with conservatives, and Bush, largely a moderate, began courting them through his work. In January 1984, Bush reported Reagans stance on Moscow had projected a strong image toward the Soviets as well as heightened the possibility of an arms agreement. On February 10, 1984, President Reagan designated Bush to lead the American delegation to the funeral of Yuri V. Andropov and convey Americas hope for an improved dialogue and cooperation which can lead to a more constructive relationship between our two countries. On February 24, Bush spoke on the progress made in Grenada as a result of the Reagan administration coming into play following Vietnam, Watergate, and the presidency of Jimmy Carter while talking to the American Soybean Association When the president faced this crisis in Grenada he didnt wait until we were taken hostage, he acted before the crisis became a humiliation. On June 14, 1984, Bush cast a tiebreaking vote in the Senate in favor of 10warhead MX missile. In September 1984, Bush said President Reagan likely would state his responsibility for the failure to protect the Beirut American embassy from bombing but stressed the difficulty of pressure. Second term, 1985 1989 Reagan and Bush ran for reelection in 1984. The Democratic opponent, Walter Mondale, made history by choosing a woman, New York Representative Geraldine Ferraro, as his running mate. She and Bush squared off in a single televised Vice Presidential debate. Ferraro served as a contrast to the IvyLeague educated Bush she represented a bluecollar district in Queens, New York. This distinction and her popularity among female journalists left Bush at a disadvantage. Regardless, the ReaganBush ticket won in a landslide against the MondaleFerraro ticket. Early into his second term as Vice President, Bush and his aides were planning a run for the presidency in 1988. By the end of 1985, a committee had been established and over two million dollars was raised for Bush. In midMarch 1985, Bush attended the funeral of Konstantin Chernenko, telling reporters in Geneva, Switzerland that he had brought a message with me to Moscow from President Reagan. It is a message of peace. During this trip, Bush pledged the US would planned military pullout from Grenada during a rally, met with President of Nicaragua Daniel Ortega for discussions on the fourpoint plan for peace of the Sandinista government in Brazil, and stated America would be committed in combatting the Sandinista regime within Nicaragua during an address in Honduras. On July 13, 1985, Bush became the first Vice President to serve as Acting President when Reagan underwent surgery to remove polyps from his colon Bush served as the acting president for approximately eight hours. In October 1985, Bush toured Pearl Harbor while he received a briefing on Pacific Fleet operations. He told reporters of an improvement in SinoAmerican relations and disclosed Taiwan as a major topic in his discussions with Chinese officials. In 1986, the Reagan administration was shaken by a scandal when it was revealed that administration officials had secretly arranged weapon sales to Iran. The officials had used the proceeds to fund the anticommunist Contras in Nicaragua, which was a direct violation of law. The scandal became known as the IranContra Affair. When news of the public embarrassment broke to the media, Bush, like Reagan, stated that he had been out of the loop and unaware of the diversion of funds, although this was later questioned. His diaries from that time stated Im one of the few people that know fully the details and as a result of six pardons by Bush, the independent counsels final report on the IranContra Affair pointedly noted The criminal investigation of Bush was regrettably incomplete. In March 1986, Bush outlined the governments policy on the combating of terrorism. In an interagency task force report presented to President Reagan, Bush publicly stated that the strategy of the federal government was to retaliate without wantonly terminating human lives. In early April 1986, Bush was hoping to preserve peace when he traveled to the Persian Gulf. Bush stressed the importance of the job of USS La Salle crew members as one of the most important jobs in the world while in Bahrain, and described American relations with North Yemen as being of high magnitude during his visit to the latter country. In May, Bush underwent a procedure to remove a malignant growth his left cheek. His spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said that doctors had found the growth weeks earlier. During an appearance at a conference in January 1987, Bush confirmed the torture and subsequent murder of William Francis Buckley. In February 1987, Bush addressed the National Religious Broadcasters, warning the group that intolerance was unacceptable and particularly called for racial tolerance. We must let our children know hatred has no place in America. The Ku Klux Klan is an embarrassment to Christ, whose gospel is love, and an embarrassment to our nation, whose gospel is freedom. In March 1987, Bush announced the resignation of advisor Fred Khedouri as well as implementation of Charles Greenleaf in the same role, and visited a drug rehabilitation center during a twoday swing through Florida, expressing the view that education was the sole means of ending drug issues throughout the US. In September 1987, Bush embarked on a month long trip to Poland and European allied countries. On September 22, Bush cast a tie breaking vote in the Senate to save the Strategic Defense Initiative from receiving a 800 million cut in funding. On September 25, Bush reemployed Peter Teeley as Director of Communications for his office and presidential campaign. On September 28, Bush delivered a televised address pledging that the US would forever be aligned with Poland. Bushs campaign director Roger Ailes and others were concerned that Bush was seen as a wimp. Bush put that image to rest when he displayed evident fury during an interview with Dan Rather. As Vice President, Bush officially opened the 1987 Pan American Games in Indianapolis. In 1988, the guided missile cruiser accidentally shot down Iran Air Flight 655, killing 290 passengers. Bush said that he would never apologize for the United States of America. Ever. I dont care what the facts are. 1988 presidential campaign Campaign logo John Ashcroft and Vice President Bush campaign in St. Louis, Missouri, 1988 In the January 26, 1987, issue of Time magazine, journalist Robert Ajemian reported in an article entitled Where Is the Real George Bush that one of Bushs friends had urged him to spend several days at Camp David thinking through his plans for his prospective presidency. Bush responded in exasperation, Oh, the vision thing. This oftcited quote became a shorthand for the charge that Bush failed to contemplate or articulate important policy positions in a compelling and coherent manner. The phrase has since become a metonym for any politicians failure to incorporate a greater vision in a campaign, and has often been applied in the media to other politicians or public figures. As early as 1985, Bush had been planning a presidential run he entered the Republican primary for President of the United States in October 1987. His challengers for the Republican presidential nomination included U.S. Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, U.S. Representative Jack Kemp of New York, former Governor Pete DuPont of Delaware, and conservative Christian televangelist Pat Robertson. Bush was considered the early frontrunner for the nomination, but he came in third in the Iowa caucus, behind winner Dole and runnerup Robertson. Much as Reagan had done in 1980, Bush reorganized his staff and concentrated on the New Hampshire primary. With Dole ahead in New Hampshire, Bush ran television commercials portraying the senator as a tax raiser he rebounded to win the states primary. Following the primary, Bush and Dole had a joint media appearance, when the interviewer asked Dole if he had anything to say to Bush, Dole said, in response to the ads, yeah, stop lying about my record in an angry tone. This is thought to have hurt Doles campaign to Bushs benefit. Bush continued seeing victory, winning many Southern primaries as well. Once the multiplestate primaries such as Super Tuesday began, Bushs organizational strength and fundraising lead were impossible for the other candidates to match, and the nomination was his. As the 1988 Republican National Convention approached, there was much speculation who Bush would choose to be his running mate. He selected littleknown U.S. Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana, who was favored by conservatives. Despite Reagans popularity, Bush trailed Democratic nominee Michael Dukakis, then Governor of Massachusetts, in most polls. Bush was occasionally criticized for his lack of eloquence when compared to Reagan, but he delivered a wellreceived speech at the 1988 Republican National Convention. Known as the thousand points of light speech, the presentation described Bushs vision of America. He endorsed the Pledge of Allegiance, prayer in schools, capital punishment, gun rights, and opposed abortion. The speech at the convention included Bushs famous pledge Read my lips no new taxes. The 1988 presidential electoral votes by state The general election campaign between the two men was described in 2008 as one of the dirtiest in modern times. Bush blamed Dukakis for polluting the Boston Harbor as the Massachusetts governor. Bush also pointed out that Dukakis was opposed to a law that would require all students to say the Pledge of Allegiance, a topic well covered in Bushs nomination acceptance speech. Dukakiss unconditional opposition to capital punishment led to a pointed question being asked during the presidential debates. Moderator Bernard Shaw asked Dukakis if Dukakis would hypothetically support the death penalty if his wife, Kitty, were raped and murdered. Dukakiss response of no, as well as a provocative ad about convicted felon Willie Horton, contributed toward Bushs characterization of Dukakis as soft on crime. Bush defeated Dukakis and his running mate, Lloyd Bentsen, in the Electoral College, by 426 to 111 . In the nationwide popular vote, Bush took 53.4 of the ballots cast while Dukakis received 45.6. Bush became the first serving Vice President to be elected President since Martin Van Buren in 1836 as well as the first person to succeed someone from his own party to the Presidency via election to the office in his own right since Herbert Hoover in 1929. Presidency Chief Justice William Rehnquist administers the Presidential Oath of Office to George H.W. Bush during Inaugural ceremonies at the United States Capitol, January 20, 1989 Bush was inaugurated on January 20, 1989, succeeding Ronald Reagan. He entered office at a period of change in the world the fall of the Berlin Wall came early in his presidency, the collapse of Soviet Union came in 1991. He ordered military operations in Panama and the Persian Gulf, and, at one point, was recorded as having a recordhigh approval rating of 89.Gallup, George W. The Gallup Poll Public Opinion, 1991 , Published 1992, Rowman Littlefield In his Inaugural Address, Bush said Domestic policy Economy Early in his term, Bush faced the problem of what to do with leftover deficits spawned by the Reagan years. At 220billion in 1990, the deficit had grown to three times its size since 1980. Bush was dedicated to curbing the deficit, believing that America could not continue to be a leader in the world without doing so. He began an effort to persuade the Democratic controlled Congress to act on the budget with Republicans believing that the best way was to cut government spending, and Democrats convinced that the only way would be to raise taxes, Bush faced problems when it came to consensus building. In the wake of a struggle with Congress, Bush was forced by the Democratic majority to raise tax revenues as a result, many Republicans felt betrayed because Bush had promised no new taxes in his 1988 campaign. Perceiving a means of revenge, Republican congressmen defeated Bushs proposal which would enact spending cuts and tax increases that would reduce the deficit by 500billion over five years. Scrambling, Bush accepted the Democrats demands for higher taxes and more spending, which alienated him from Republicans and gave way to a sharp decrease in popularity. Bush would later say that he wished he had never signed the bill. Near the end of the 101st Congress, the president and congressional members reached a compromise on a budget package that increased the marginal tax rate and phased out exemptions for highincome taxpayers. Although he originally demanded a reduction in the capital gains tax, Bush relented on this issue as well. This agreement with the Democratic leadership in Congress proved to be a turning point in the Bush presidency his popularity among Republicans never fully recovered. Bushs approval ratings compared to his disapproval ratings for his fouryear presidency Coming at around the same time as the budget deal, America entered into a mild recession, lasting for six months. Many government programs, such as welfare, increased. As the unemployment rate edged upward in 1991, Bush signed a bill providing additional benefits for unemployed workers. The year 1991 was marked by many corporate reorganizations, which laid off a substantial number of workers. Many now unemployed were Republicans and independents, who had believed that their jobs were secure. By his second year in office, Bush was told by his economic advisors to stop dealing with the economy, as they believed that he had done everything necessary to ensure his reelection. By 1992, interest and inflation rates were the lowest in years, but by midyear the unemployment rate reached 7.8, the highest since 1984. In September 1992, the Census Bureau reported that 14.2 of all Americans lived in poverty. At a press conference in 1990, Bush told reporters that he found foreign policy more enjoyable. Education In an April 13, 1989 address in Union, New Jersey, Bush outlined the education policy of his administration We want to help those most in need, targeting federal resources where they can do the most good. We want to waive some regulations for poorer communities, allowing them to pool state and federal funds in exchange for higher accountability and performance a kind of performancedriven partial deregulation of education.Remarks to Participants in Project Educational Forum in Union, New Jersey From September 27 28, 1989, Bush held a twoday summit with American governors dedicated solely to education reform at the University of Virginia, the group forming a consensus to overhaul the American education system for the countrys students to be closer in test scores in science, mathematics, and literacy. In the 1990 State of the Union Address, Bush revealed his interest in his administration spearheading the increase in American high school graduation rates to 90 along with making American students first in the world in the subjects of math and science by 2000. In a speech in the White House East Room on April 18, 1991, Bush called for both public and private citizens to become involved with education reform To those who want to see real improvement in American education, I say there will be no renaissance without revolution. Its time we held our schools, and ourselves, accountable for results. On August 18, 1991, during a satellite teleconference with the summer meeting of the National Governors Association, Bush announced that he would deliver a national address on the current status of troubled American schools timed for the beginning of a new school year the following month. On October 4, 1991, Bush met with representatives of the New American Schools Development Corp. at Camp David as the organization sought 200 million USD for education reform to aid with the forming of new learning environments. In a November 25, 1991 appearance in Columbus, Ohio, Bush joined Governor of Ohio George Voinovich in formally announcing a state version of his education policy, Ohio 2000. During his address, Bush declared he would be involved with a reform of troubled schools and charged the Democratcontrolled Congress with fighting tooth and nail against our most important reforms. Major initiatives During a speech to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing, Bush announced a vision to complete Space Station Freedom , resume exploration of the Moon and begin exploration of Mars. Although a space station was eventually constructed work on the International Space Station began in 1998 other work has been confounded by NASA budgetary issues. In 1998, Bush received the Rotary National Award for Space Achievements National Space Trophy for his pioneering leadership of the U.S. space program. Bush signed a number of major laws in his presidency, including the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 this was one of the most procivil rights bills in decades. He is also the only President to successfully veto a civil rights act, having vetoed the jobdiscrimination protection Civil Rights Act of 1990.Devroy, Ann. Bush Vetoes Civil Rights Bill Measure Said to Encourage Job Quotas Women, Minorities Sharply Critical. The Washington Post October 23, 1990, Print. Note. Bush feared racial quotas would be imposed, but later approved watereddown Civil Rights Act of 1991. He worked to increase federal spending for education, childcare, and advanced technology research. He also signed the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act which provides monetary compensation of people who had contracted cancer and a number of other specified diseases as a direct result of their exposure to atmospheric nuclear testing undertaken by the United States during the Cold War, or their exposure to high levels of radon while doing uranium mining. In dealing with the environment, Bush reauthorized the Clean Air Act, requiring cleaner burning fuels. He quarreled with Congress over an eventually signed bill to aid police in capturing criminals, and signed into law a measure to improve the nations highway system. Bush signed the Immigration Act of 1990, Encyclopedia of Minorities in American Politics African Americans and Asian Americans . Jeffrey D. Schultz . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 282. which led to a 40 percent increase in legal immigration to the United States. The Paper curtain employer sanctions implementation, impact, and reform . Michael Fix . The Urban Institute. p. 304. Bush became a life member of the National Rifle Association early in 1988 and had campaigned as a progun candidate with the NRAs endorsement. In March 1989, he placed a temporary ban on the import of certain semiautomatic rifles. This action cost him endorsement from the NRA in 1992. Bush publicly resigned his life membership in the organization after receiving a form letter from NRA depicting agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms as jackbooted thugs. He called the NRA letter a vicious slander on good people. Points of Light President Bush devoted attention to voluntary service as a means of solving some of Americas most serious social problems. He often used the thousand points of light theme to describe the power of citizens to solve community problems. In his 1989 inaugural address, President Bush said, I have spoken of a thousand points of light, of all the community organizations that are spread like stars throughout the Nation, doing good. Four years later, in his report to the nation on The Points of Light Movement, President Bush said, Points of Light are the soul of America. They are ordinary people who reach beyond themselves to touch the lives of those in need, bringing hope and opportunity, care and friendship. By giving so generously of themselves, these remarkable individuals show us not only what is best in our heritage but what all of us are called to become. In 1990, the Points of Light Foundation was created as a nonprofit organization in Washington to promote this spirit of volunteerism. In 2007, the Points of Light Foundation merged with the Hands On Network with the goal of strengthening volunteerism, streamlining costs and services and deepening impact. Points of Light, the organization created through this merger, has approximately 250 affiliates in 22 countries and partnerships with thousands of nonprofits and companies dedicated to volunteer service around the world. In 2012, Points of Light mobilized 4 million volunteers in 30 million hours of service worth 635 million. On October 16, 2009, President Barack Obama held a Presidential Forum on Service hosted by former President George H. W. Bush and Points of Light at the George Bush Presidential Library Center on the campus of Texas AM University. The event celebrated the contributions of more than 4,500 Daily Point of Light award winners and honored President Bushs legacy of service and civic engagement. In 2011, Points of Light paid tribute to President George H. W. Bush and volunteer service at Washington, D.C.s Kennedy Center. President Bush was joined by Presidents Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush to highlight the role volunteer service plays in peoples lives. Daily Point of Light Award President Bush created the Daily Point of Light Award in 1989 to recognize ordinary Americans from all walks of life taking direct and consequential voluntary action in their communities to solve serious social problems. The President focused great attention on these individuals and organizations, both to honor them for their tremendous work and to call the nation to join them and multiply their efforts. By the end of his administration, President Bush had recognized 1,020 Daily Points of Light representing all 50 states and addressing issues ranging from care for infants and teenagers with AIDS to adult illiteracy and from gang violence to job training for the homeless. The Daily Point of Light continues to be awarded by Points of Light and President Bush continues to sign all of the awards. On July 15, 2013, President Barack Obama welcomed President Bush to the White House to celebrate the 5,000th Daily Point of Light Award. They bestowed the award on Floyd Hammer and Kathy Hamilton of Union, Iowa, for their work founding Outreach, a nonprofit that delivers free meals to hungry children in 15 countries. Judicial appointments Supreme Court Bush appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States David Souter 1990 Clarence Thomas 1991 Other courts In addition to his two Supreme Court appointments, Bush appointed 42 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 148 judges to the United States district courts. Among these appointments was Vaughn R. Walker, who would later be revealed to be the earliest known gay federal judge. Bush also experienced a number of judicial appointment controversies, as 11 nominees for 10 federal appellate judgeships were not processed by the Democraticallycontrolled Senate Judiciary Committee.Congressional Chronicle , CSPAN . Foreign policy Bush speaks on the telephone regarding Operation Just Cause with General Brent Scowcroft and Chief of Staff John H. Sununu, 1989 Panama In the 1980s, Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega, a once U.S.supportive leader who was later accused of spying for Fidel Castro and using Panama to traffic drugs into the United States, was one of the most recognizable names in America and was constantly in the press. The struggle to remove him from power began in the Reagan administration, when economic sanctions were imposed on the country this included prohibiting American companies and government from making payments to Panama and freezing 56million in Panamanian funds in American banks. Reagan sent more than 2,000 American troops to Panama as well. Unlike Reagan, Bush was able to remove Noriega from power, but his administrations unsuccessful postinvasion planning hindered the needs of Panama during the establishment of the young democratic government. In May 1989, Panama held democratic elections, in which Guillermo Endara was elected president the results were then annulled by Noriegas government. In response, Bush sent 2,000 more troops to the country, where they began conducting regular military exercises in Panamanian territory . Bush then removed an embassy and ambassador from the country, and dispatched additional troops to Panama to prepare the way for an upcoming invasion. Noriega suppressed an October military coup attempt and massive protests in Panama against him, but after a U.S. serviceman was shot by Panamanian forces in December 1989, Bush ordered 24,000 troops into the country with an objective of removing Noriega from power Operation Just Cause was a largescale American military operation, and the first in more than 40 years that was not related to the Cold War. The mission was controversial, but American forces achieved control of the country and Endara assumed the Presidency. Noriega surrendered to the United States and was convicted and imprisoned on racketeering and drug trafficking charges in April 1992. President Bush and First Lady Barbara Bush visited Panama in June 1992, to give support to the first postinvasion Panamanian government. Soviet Union Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev in Helsinki summit in 1990 In 1989, just after the fall of the Berlin Wall, Bush met with Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev in a conference on the Mediterranean island of Malta. The administration had been under intense pressure to meet with the Soviets, but not all initially found the Malta Summit to be a step in the right direction General Brent Scowcroft, among others, was apprehensive about the meeting, saying that it might be premature due to concerns where, according to Condoleezza Rice, expectations be set that something was going to happen, where the Soviets might grandstand and force U.S. into agreements that would ultimately not be good for the United States. But European leaders, including Franois Mitterrand and Margaret Thatcher, encouraged Bush to meet with Gorbachev, something that he did December 2 and 3, 1989.See Malta Summit for more information Though no agreements were signed, the meeting was viewed largely as being an important one when asked about nuclear war, Gorbachev responded, I assured the President of the United States that the Soviet Union would never start a hot war against the United States of America. And we would like our relations to develop in such a way that they would open greater possibilities for cooperation.... This is just the beginning. We are just at the very beginning of our road, long road to a longlasting, peaceful period. The meeting was received as a very important step to the end of the Cold War. Another summit was held in July 1991, where the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty was signed by Bush and Gorbachev in Moscow. The treaty took nine years in the making and was the first major arms agreement since the signing of the Intermediate Ranged Nuclear Forces Treaty by Reagan and Gorbachev in 1987. The contentions in START would reduce the strategic nuclear weapons of the United States and the USSR by about 35 over seven years, and the Soviet Unions landbased intercontinental ballistic missiles would be cut by 50. Bush described START as a significant step forward in dispelling half a century of mistrust. After the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, President Bush and Gorbachev declared a U.S.Russian strategic partnership, marking the end of the Cold War. Gulf War President Bush visits American troops in Saudi Arabia on Thanksgiving Day, 1990 On August 2, 1990, Iraq, led by Saddam Hussein, invaded its oilrich neighbor to the south, Kuwait Bush condemned the invasion and began rallying opposition to Iraq in the US and among European, Asian, and Middle Eastern allies. Secretary of Defense Richard Bruce Dick Cheney traveled to Saudi Arabia to meet with King Fahd Fahd requested US military aid in the matter, fearing a possible invasion of his country as well. The request was met initially with Air Force fighter jets. Iraq made attempts to negotiate a deal that would allow the country to take control of half of Kuwait. Bush rejected this proposal and insisted on a complete withdrawal of Iraqi forces. The planning of a ground operation by USled coalition forces began forming in September 1990, headed by General Norman Schwarzkopf. Bush spoke before a joint session of the U.S. Congress regarding the authorization of air and land attacks, laying out four immediate objectives Iraq must withdraw from Kuwait completely, immediately, and without condition. Kuwaits legitimate government must be restored. The security and stability of the Persian Gulf must be assured. And American citizens abroad must be protected. He then outlined a fifth, longterm objective Out of these troubled times, our fifth objective a new world order can emerge a new era freer from the threat of terror, stronger in the pursuit of justice, and more secure in the quest for peace. An era in which the nations of the world, East and West, North and South, can prosper and live in harmony.... A world where the rule of law supplants the rule of the jungle. A world in which nations recognize the shared responsibility for freedom and justice. A world where the strong respect the rights of the weak. With the United Nations Security Council opposed to Iraqs violence, Congress authorized the use of military force with a set goal of returning control of Kuwait to the Kuwaiti government, and protecting Americas interests abroad. Bush meets with Robert Gates, General Colin Powell, Secretary Dick Cheney and others about the situation in the Persian Gulf and Operation Desert Shield, January 15, 1991 Early on the morning of January 17, 1991, allied forces launched the first attack, which included more than 4,000 bombing runs by coalition aircraft. This pace would continue for the next four weeks, until a ground invasion was launched on February 24, 1991. Allied forces penetrated Iraqi lines and pushed toward Kuwait City while on the west side of the country, forces were intercepting the retreating Iraqi army. Bush made the decision to stop the offensive after a mere 100 hours. Critics labeled this decision premature, as hundreds of Iraqi forces were able to escape Bush responded by saying that he wanted to minimize U.S. casualties. Opponents further charged that Bush should have continued the attack, pushing Husseins army back to Baghdad, then removing him from power. Bush explained that he did not give the order to overthrow the Iraqi government because it would have incurred incalculable human and political costs.... We would have been forced to occupy Baghdad and, in effect, rule Iraq. Bushs approval ratings skyrocketed after the successful offensive. Additionally, President Bush and Secretary of State Baker felt the coalition victory had increased U.S. prestige abroad and believed there was a window of opportunity to use the political capital generated by the coalition victory to revitalize the ArabIsraeli peace process. The administration immediately returned to ArabIsraeli peacemaking following the end of the Gulf War this resulted in the Madrid Conference, later in 1991.Middle East Review of International Affairs Journal Volume 6, No. 1 March 2002 Underwriting Peace in the Middle East U.S. Foreign Policy and the Limits of Economic Inducements Somali Civil War Faced with a humanitarian disaster in Somalia, exacerbated by a complete breakdown in civil order, the United Nations had created the UNOSOM I mission in April 1992 to aid the situation through humanitarian efforts, though the mission failed. The Bush administration proposed American aid to the region by assisting in creating a secure environment for humanitarian efforts and UN Resolution 794 was unanimously adopted by the Security Council on December 3, 1992.Security Council Resolution 794 A lame duck president, Bush launched Operation Restore Hope the following day under which the United States would assume command in accordance with Resolution 794.Bush, George H., Address to the Nation on the Situation in Somalia, 41292 Fighting would escalate and continue into the Clinton administration. Japan On April 28, 1989, during an appearance in the press room of the White House, Bush announced the US would continue a deal with Japan on the production of the FSX advanced fighter jet now that promises had been made that American jobs and technology would be safe and said the proposal would bolster security for both the US and Japan. On November 21, 1989, Bush signed a measure guaranteeing reparations to JapaneseAmericans interred during World War II, 20,000 USD for each survivor having been authorized by Congress. On March 12, 1990, Bush met with former Prime Minister of Japan Noboru Takeshita for an hour to discuss shared economic issues and the fact that their solution will require extraordinary efforts on both sides of the Pacific. On December 7, 1991, the fiftieth anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor, Bush accepted an apology from Japan over the event issued by Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa the previous day and urged progress be made in improving relations between the US and Japan. Israel On June 18, 1990, White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater confirmed President Bush had sent Prime Minister of Israel Yitzhak Shamir a letter in which he congratulated the latter on his election and urged him to support the proposed Shamir initiative for peace, which would involve the participation of Palestinian Arabians in local elections. On June 20, 1990, Bush suspended American dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization for the latters refusal to condemn the Palestinian guerrilla raid of an Israeli beach the previous month. NAFTA From left to right President Carlos Salinas, President Bush, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney Jaime Serra Puche, Carla Hills, and Michael Wilson at the NAFTA Initialing Ceremony, October 1992 Bushs administration, along with the Progressive Conservative Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, spearheaded the negotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement , which would eliminate the majority of tariffs on products traded among the United States, Canada, and Mexico, to encourage trade amongst the countries. The treaty also restricts patents, copyrights, and trademarks, and outlines the removal of investment restrictions among the three countries. President Bush announced the completion of NAFTA during a Rose Garden appearance on August 12, 1992, calling it the beginning of a new era. The agreement came under heavy scrutiny amongst mainly Democrats, who charged that NAFTA resulted in a loss of American jobs. NAFTA also contained no provisions for labor rights according to the Bush administration, the trade agreement would generate economic resources necessary to enable Mexicos government to overcome problems of funding and enforcement of its labor laws. Bush needed a renewal of negotiating authority to move forward with the NAFTA trade talks. Such authority would enable the president to negotiate a trade accord that would be submitted to Congress for a vote, thereby avoiding a situation in which the president would be required to renegotiate with trading partners those parts of an agreement that Congress wished to change. While initial signing was possible during his term, negotiations made slow, but steady, progress. President Clinton would go on to make the passage of NAFTA a priority for his administration, despite its conservative and Republican roots with the addition of two side agreements to achieve its passage in 1993. The treaty has since been defended as well as criticized further. The American economy has grown 54 since the adoption of NAFTA in 1993, with 25million new jobs created this was seen by some as evidence of NAFTA being beneficial to the United States. With talk in early 2008 regarding a possible American withdrawal from the treaty, Carlos M. Gutierrez, current United States Secretary of Commerce, writes, Quitting NAFTA would send economic shock waves throughout the world, and the damage would start here at home. But John J. Sweeney, President of the AFLCIO, wrote in The Boston Globe that the U.S. trade deficit with Canada and Mexico ballooned to 12 times its preNAFTA size, reaching 111billion in 2004. Bush and Chilean leader Augusto Pinochet Pardons As other presidents have done, Bush issued a series of pardons during his last days in office. On December 24, 1992, he granted executive clemency to six former government employees implicated in the IranContra scandal of the late 1980s, most prominently former Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger. Bush described Weinberger, who was scheduled to stand trial on January 5, 1993, for criminal charges related to IranContra, as a true American patriot. In addition to Weinberger, Bush pardoned Duane R. Clarridge, Clair E. George, Robert C. McFarlane, Elliott Abrams, and Alan G. Fiers Jr., all of whom had been indicted andor convicted of criminal charges by an Independent Counsel headed by Lawrence Walsh. Honorary degrees Liberty University, awarded a Doctor of Humanities in 1990. Texas AM University Sacred Heart University Dartmouth College, awarded a Doctor of Laws Harvard University awarded a Doctor of Laws degree on May 29, 2014. National Intelligence University awarded a Doctor of Strategic Intelligence degree on March 8, 2016. Awards and honors In 1990, Time magazine named him the Man of the Year. In 1991, the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation awarded Bush its Lone Sailor award for his naval service and his subsequent government service. In 1993, he was made an Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath by Queen Elizabeth II. In 2009, he received the PGA Tour Lifetime Achievement Award. 1992 presidential campaign In early 1992, Bush announced that he would seek a second term. A coalition victory in the Persian Gulf War and high approval ratings made reelection seem likely. As a result, many leading Democrats declined to seek their partys presidential nomination. On the negative side, Bushs popularity was reduced by an economic recession and doubts of whether he properly ended the Gulf War. Conservative political columnist Pat Buchanan challenged Bush for the Republican nomination. He shocked political pundits by finishing second, with 37 of the vote in the New Hampshire primary. Bush responded by adopting more conservative positions on issues, in an attempt to undermine Buchanans base. Once he had secured the nomination, Bush faced his Democratic challenger, Arkansas Govenor Bill Clinton. Clinton attacked Bush as a politician who was not doing enough to assist the working middleclass and being out of touch with the common man, a notion reinforced by reporter Andrew Rosenthals false report that Bush was astonished to see a demonstration of a supermarket scanner. The 1992 presidential electoral votes by state In early 1992, the race took an unexpected twist when Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot launched a third party bid, claiming that neither Republicans nor Democrats could eliminate the deficit and make government more efficient. His message appealed to voters across the political spectrum disappointed with both parties perceived fiscal irresponsibility. Perot later bowed out of the race for a short time, then reentered. Clinton had originally been in the lead, until Perot reentered, tightening the race significantly. As Election Day neared, the polls suggested that the race was a deadheat, but Clinton pulled out on top, with 370 electoral votes to Bushs 168 votes. Perot won 19 of the popular vote, one of the highest totals for a third party candidate in U.S. history, drawing equally from both major candidates, according to exit polls. Several key factors led to Bushs defeat. The ailing economy that arose from recession may have been the main factor in Bushs loss. On Election Day, 7 in 10 voters said that the economy was either not so good or poor. On the eve of the 1992 election, after unemployment reports of 7.8 appeared , Economic recession had contributed to a sharp decline in his approval rating to just 37. Conservative Republicans pointed out that Bushs 1990 agreement to raise taxes contradicted his famous Read my lips no new taxes pledge. In doing so, Bush alienated many members of his conservative base, losing their support for his reelection. According to one survey, of the voters who cited Bushs broken No New Taxes pledge as very important, two thirds voted for Bill Clinton. Bush had raised taxes in an attempt to address an increasing budget deficit, which has largely been attributed to the Reagan tax cuts and military spending of the 1980s. The tax revenue increase had not hurt his approval ratings to the extent that it prevented it from reaching 89 during the Gulf War, four months after the tax vote.The Illusory Power of Grover Norquist Timothy Noah November 27, 2012 By February 1991 his approval rating rose to its highest level 89.Presidential Approval Ratings Gallup Historical Statistics and Trends Gallup.com Public image Bush visits NAS JRB, New Orleans personnel before he receives briefs on the status of Joint Task Force Katrina relief efforts, October 2005 George Bush was widely seen as a pragmatic caretaker president who lacked a unified and compelling longterm theme in his efforts. Indeed, Bushs sound bite where he refers to the issue of overarching purpose as the vision thing has become a metonym applied to other political figures accused of similar difficulties. He does not say why he wants to be there, wrote columnist George Will, so the public does not know why it should care if he gets his way. His Ivy League and prep school education led to warnings by advisors that his image was too preppy in 1980, which resulted in deliberate efforts in his 1988 campaign to shed the image, including meeting voters at factories and shopping malls, abandoning set speeches. His ability to gain broad international support for the Gulf War and the wars result were seen as both a diplomatic and military triumph, rousing bipartisan approval, though his decision to withdraw without removing Saddam Hussein left mixed feelings, and attention returned to the domestic front and a souring economy. A New York Times article mistakenly depicted Bush as being surprised to see a supermarket barcode reader the report of his reaction exacerbated the notion that he was out of touch. Amid the early 1990s recession, his image shifted from conquering hero to politician befuddled by economic matters. Although Bush became the first elected Republican president since Hoover in 1932 to lose a reelection bid , the mood did not last. Despite his defeat, Bush climbed back from election day approval levels to leave office in 1993 with a 56 job approval rating. By December 2008, 60 of Americans gave Bushs presidency a positive rating. Postpresidency Upon leaving office, Bush retired with his wife, Barbara, and temporarily moved into a friends house near the Tanglewood community of Houston as they prepared to build a permanent retirement house nearby.From White House to regular house. Associated Press at the Ocala StarBanner . Saturday November 21, 1992. 2A. Retrieved from Google Books on October 14, 2012. Ultimately they built their retirement house in the community of West Oaks, near Tanglewood. They had a presidential office within the Park Laureate Building on Memorial Drive.Bushes upbeat for stepdown. Fort Worth StarTelegram . January 10, 1993. 1 News. Retrieved on October 15, 2012. Bushs Houston office will be in the Park Laureate Building on Memorial Drive Mimi Swartz of National Geographic wrote that The Bushes are too studiously sedate to live in River Oaks.Swartz, Mimi. Survival of the Richest. National Geographic . March 2006. Retrieved on June 4, 2014. They spend the summer at Walkers Point in Kennebunkport, Maine. On January 10, 1999, the Bushes became the longestmarried Presidential couple in history, outlasting John and Abigail Adams, who were married for 54 years and 3 days. At 70 years as of January 2015, they still hold the record, by a year and a half, over Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter. Bush cofounded an annual fishing tournament in Islamorada, an island in the Florida Keys, which was held annually for 10 years. In 1993, Bush was awarded an honorary knighthood by Queen Elizabeth II. He was the third American president to receive the honor, the others being Dwight D. Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan. In 1993, Bush visited Kuwait to commemorate the coalitions victory over Iraq in the Gulf War, where he was targeted in an assassination plot. Kuwaiti authorities arrested 17 people allegedly involved in using a car bomb to kill Bush. Through interviews with the suspects and examinations of the bombs circuitry and wiring, the FBI established that the plot had been directed by the Iraqi Intelligence Service. A Kuwaiti court later convicted all but one of the defendants. Two months later, in retaliation, Clinton ordered the firing of 23 cruise missiles at Iraqi Intelligence Service headquarters in Baghdad. The day before the strike, U.S. Ambassador to the UN Madeleine Albright went before the Security Council to present evidence of the Iraqi plot. After the missiles were fired, Vice President Al Gore said the attack was intended to be a proportionate response at the place where this plot to assassinate Bush was hatched and implemented. In September 1993, Bush was invited back to the White House along with other living former presidents for an ArabIsraeli peace accord as well as make the case to Clinton for a repeal of NAFTA. In April 1994, Bush attended the funeral of Richard Nixon. In the 1994 elections, his sons George W. and Jeb concurrently ran for Governor of Texas and Governor of Florida. The elder Bush frequently telephoned their headquarters for updates on the race.Meacham, p. 549. George W. won his race against Ann Richards while Jeb lost to Lawton Chiles. After the results came in, the elder Bush told ABC, I have very mixed emotions. Proud father, is the way I would sum it all up. From 1993 to 1999 he served as the chairman to the board of trustees for Eisenhower Fellowships, and from 2007 to 2009 was chairman of the National Constitution Center. On September 28, 1994, Bush said he was opposed to sending American troops to Haiti, citing his loss of confidence in President of Haiti JeanBertrand Aristide while speaking to business and civic leaders in Houston. In an October 22, 1994 speech in Cancun, Mexico, Bush said history would vindicate him for not attempting to force Saddam Hussein out of power while in office The Mideast peace talks that offer hope to the world would never have started if we had done that. The Arabs would never have talked to us. On July 17, 1995, Bush returned to the White House for the unveiling of his official portrait in an East Room ceremony attended by former members of his administration. In September 1995, Bush met with President of Vietnam L c Anh and party secretary Mi in Vietnam. On September 2, Bush and his son George W. participated in a parade commemorating World War II in Fredericksburg, Texas, where the elder Bush reasoned the US had become united in the aftermath of the Pearl Harbor attack and stressed America would have to stay involved in world affairs to continue its unity. On July 26, 1996, Bush met with Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole and pledged he would do everything in his power to aid in securing a victory for Dole in the presidential election. On October 6, Bush and Dole lunched together during a preparation for upcoming debates with President Clinton, Bushs experience with debating Clinton prompting Dole to seek out his advice. In 1997, the same year as the opening of his Presidential Library, Houston Intercontinental Airport was renamed George Bush Intercontinental Airport. In February 1997, Bush endorsed the chemical weapon banning treaty supported by United States Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, saying the US would need to approve the treaty ahead of the April deadline. In April 1997, Bush gave a speech at a convocation of a weekend conference analyzing his presidency and joined President Bill Clinton, former President Ford, and Nancy Reagan in signing the Summit Declaration of Commitment in advocating for participation by private citizens in solving domestic issues within the United States. In August 1997, Bush agreed to be interviewed by the New York Times , so long as his portrayal not appear to be giving credit to himself, over the balanced budget deal composed by President Clinton and House Speaker Newt Gingrich, stating his belief that history would show his administration laid the groundwork for the agreement during a telephone interview. President Bush is Honorary Chairman of Points of Light, an international nonprofit dedicated to engaging more people and resources in solving serious social problems through voluntary service. In January 1999, Bush spoke in the Old Senate chamber as part of a lecture series for Senators in an address warning against the collapse of political decorum and invasions into the privacy of individuals. In February 1999, Bush was part of the American delegation to the funeral of Hussein of Jordan in Amman. In May 1999, Bush and his wife Barbara honored six senior citizens during the annual Ageless Heroes honors in Chicago, Illinois. George W. Bush presidency His eldest son, George W. Bush, was inaugurated as the 43rd President of the United States on January 20, 2001, and reelected in 2004. Through previous administrations, the elder Bush had ubiquitously been known as George Bush or President Bush, but following his sons election the need to distinguish between them has made retronymic forms such as George H. W. Bush and George Bush senior and colloquialisms such as Bush 41 and Bush the Elder much more common. H.W. Bush was traveling to Minnesota for a speaking engagement on the day of the September 11 attacks. George W. made multiple calls to get in contact with his father before the two men reconnected after the elder Bush had gone to a Brookfield, Wisconsin motel. Bush told biographer Jon Meacham that his sons vice president, Dick Cheney, underwent a change following the September 11 attacks His seeming knuckling under to the real hardcharging guys who want to fight about everything, use force to get our way in the Middle East. In December 2002, George W. sought counsel from the elder Bush regarding Iraq and informed him of my efforts to rally the Saudis, Jordanians, Turks, and others in the Middle East.Meacham, pp. 571572. In April 2003, following the fall of Baghdad, Bush praised George W. in an email to the incumbent president.Meacham, p. 274. In a September 14, 2003 interview with BBC, Bush stated his support for a continuation of his sons war against terrorism and the US was in a better state in terms of protecting itself from terrorism than two years prior. While visiting Houston VA Medical Center on December 17, Bush told reporters of his satisfaction with the capture of Saddam Hussein. George and Barbara Bush. On March 2, 2006, President Bush announced his father would lead the American delegation to the inauguration of Presidentelect of the Republic of Portugal Anibal Cavaco Silva.President Announces Former President Bush to Lead U.S. Delegation to Attend Portuguese Inauguration Presidential library The George Bush Presidential Library is the presidential library named for Bush. This tenth presidential library was built between 1995 and 1997 and contains the presidential and vicepresidential papers of Bush and the vicepresidential papers of Dan Quayle. It was dedicated on November 6, 1997, and opened to the public shortly thereafter the architectural firm of Hellmuth, Obata and Kassabaum designed the complex. The George Bush Presidential Library and Museum is located on a site on the west campus of Texas AM University in College Station, Texas, on a plaza adjoining the Presidential Conference Center and the Texas AM Academic Center. The Library operates under NARAs administration and the Presidential Libraries Act of 1955s provisions. The Bush School of Government and Public Service is a graduate public policy school at Texas AM University in College Station, Texas. The graduate school is part of the presidential library complex, and offers four programs two masters degree programs and three certificate programs . The Master in International Affairs degree program offers concentrations in either National Security and Diplomacy or International Development and Economic Policy. Later activities Bush continues to make many public appearances. He and Mrs. Bush attended the state funeral of Ronald Reagan in June 2004, and of Gerald Ford in January 2007. One month later, he was awarded the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award in Beverly Hills, California, by former First Lady Nancy Reagan. Despite Bushs political differences with Bill Clinton, reports have acknowledged that the two former presidents have become friends. He and Clinton appeared together in television ads in 2005, encouraging aid for victims of Hurricane Katrina and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. In October 2004, Bush endorsed Pete Sessions and Ted Poe in Texas congressional races. In February 2006, Bush attended and delivered a eulogy at the funeral of Coretta Scott King. In September 2006, Bush campaigned for New Jersey Senate candidate Thomas Kean, Jr., praising him as well as stating his respect for Kean calling on the resignation of US Defense Secretary Rumsfeld. Kean went on to lose the election. In October 2006, Bush was honored by the National Italian American Foundation with the NIAF One America Award for fundraising, with Bill Clinton, for the victims of the 2004 tsunami and Hurricane Katrina. On December 4, 2006, Bush delivered a speech on leadership during a leadership forum by his son Jeb in Tallahassee, Florida. Later that month, upon the death of Gerald Ford, Bush became the oldest living president, 111 days older than Jimmy Carter. On February 18, 2008, Bush formally endorsed Senator John McCain for President of the United States. The endorsement offered a boost to McCains campaign, as the Arizona Senator had been facing criticism among many conservatives. During a trip to Tokyo, Japan, Bush said that he would campaign vigorously against Senator Hillary Clinton were she to initiate a presidential bid. In March 2008, Bush met with President of the Peoples Republic of China Hu Jintao who praised Bush for his attempts at harmonizing relations between the US and China. On May 17, 2008, Bush delivered the commencement address at Bryant University. On November 16, 2008, during an address at the University of Kansas, Bush said Presidentelect Obama would encounter diverse issues upon taking office and experiencing a wave of enthusiasm. On January 10, 2009, both George H. W. and George W. Bush were present at the commissioning of , the tenth and last supercarrier of the United States Navy. Bush paid a visit to the carrier again on May 26, 2009. In June 2009, Bush came out in support for Sonia Sotomayor to receive fair hearings in her nomination for Associate Justice on the Supreme Court. She was called by somebody a racist once. Thats not right. I mean, thats not fair. It doesnt help the process. Youre out there namecalling. So let them decide who they want to vote for and get on with it. In October 2009, Bush criticized the rampant criticism of the current times, reflecting that he did not receive such day in and day out during his presidency and named Keith Olbermann and Rachel Maddow of MSNBC as examples he called the two sick puppies. Also during that month, on October 16, Bush joined President Barack Obama onstage at Texas AM University for a promotion of volunteering. In 2011, he was inducted in the World Golf Hall of Fame. On February 15, 2011, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom the highest civilian honor in the United States by President Barack Obama.For the transcript of Obamas remarks honoring Bush, see After the death of Betty Ford in July 2011, Bush issued a statement No one confronted lifes struggles with more fortitude or honesty, and as a result, we all learned from the challenges she faced. On March 29, 2012, Bush endorsed Mitt Romney for the Republican presidential nomination in the 2012 Presidential election, NBC News reporting that Bush had chosen to support Romney three months prior. In July 2013, Bush had his head shaved in a show of support for the twoyearold son of a member of his security detail, who had leukemia. On July 7, Bush met with Gabrielle Giffords for part of her weeklong Rights and Responsibilities Tour advocating expanded background checks in relation to firearm purchases. In April 2014, Frederick D. McClure, chief executive of the Bush library foundation, organized a threeday gathering in College Park, Texas, to mark the 25th anniversary of the Bush administration. Also in early 2014, the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation presented the Profile in Courage Award to Bush and Mount Vernon awarded him its first Cyrus A. Ansary Prize.Baker, Peter, Bush 41 Reunion Looks to Burnish His Legacy, New York Times , April 3, 2014. Retrieved April 4, 2014. The Kennedy foundation award was presented by Jack Schlossberg, the late presidents grandson, to Lauren Bush Lauren, who accepted on her grandfathers behalf.Edelman, Adam, George H.W. Bush honored with Kennedy Profile in Courage Award, New York Daily News , May 4, 2014. Retrieved June 1, 2014. The Ansary prize was presented in Houston with Ansary, Barbara Lucas, Ryan C. Crocker, dean of the Bush school since January 2010, Barbara Bush, and Curt Viebranz in attendance with the former president. Bush directed 50,000 of the prize to the Bush school at Texas AM, and 25,000 will fund an animation about the Siege of Yorktown for Mt. Vernon. Viebranz and Lucas represented Mount Vernon at the presentation.Senior staff, mountvernon.org . Viebranz is identified as president and CEO of George Washingtons Mount Vernon. Retrieved June 14, 2014.Presidents Day 2014 Barbara Lucas, mountvernon.org . Lucas is identified as regent of Mount Vernons Ladies Association. Retrieved June 14, 2014. On June 12, 2014, Bush fulfilled a longstanding promise by skydiving on his 90th birthday. He made the parachute jump from a helicopter near his home at 1115a.m. in Kennebunkport, Maine. The jump marked the eighth time the former president had skydived, including jumps on his 80th and 85th birthday as well. He had tweeted about the incident prior to the jump, saying Its a wonderful day in Maine in fact, nice enough for a parachute jump. In November 2014, George W. confirmed that his father wanted Jeb to launch a presidential bid in 2016. After Jebs withdrawal from the Republican primary, a Bush spokesman confirmed he would not endorse any other candidates At age 91, President Bush is retired from politics. He came out of retirement to do a few things for Jeb, but those were the exceptions that proved the rule. After the 2016 election took place, Bush tweeted a congratulatory message to Presidentelect Donald Trump. On December 7, 2016, Bush and former Senator Bob Dole commemorated the 75th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor by appearing at the Bush Center of Texas AM University. On February 5, 2017, George and Barbara Bush participated in the coin toss for Super Bowl LI. On May 18, 2017, after the death of Roger Ailes, Bush tweeted, He wasnt perfect, but Roger Ailes was my friend I loved him. Not sure I would have been President wo his great talent, loyal help. RIP. In July 2017, following Senator McCains cancer diagnosis announcement, Bush released a statement The Hanoi Hilton couldn t break John McCain s spirit many years ago, so Barbara and I know with confidence he and his family will meet this latest battle in his singular life of service with courage and determination. On August 16, 2017, Bush and his son George W. released a joint statement in which they condemned the violence at the Unite the Right rally. On September 7, 2017, Bush partnered with former Presidents Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities. Health On February 24, 2000, Bush was standing at a reception for 90 minutes when he felt lightheaded. He was admitted to a hospital with an irregular heartbeat. When Bush was dismissed three days later, his doctors said that he had retained the irregularity in his heartbeat. On March 11, 2007, Bush fainted on a golf course and was admitted to the Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage and was released the following morning. Bush suffers from vascular parkinsonism, a form of Parkinsons disease that has forced him to use a motorized scooter or wheelchair since at least 2012. In July 2015, Bush suffered a severe neck injury. At age 91 in October, he was wearing a neck brace in his first public engagement since the accident when he threw the ceremonial first pitch for the Houston Astros at Minute Maid Park. Bush sent a letter to presidentelect Donald Trump in January, 2017 to inform him that because of his poor health, he would not be able to attend Trumps inauguration on January 20 he gave him his best wishes. On January 18, he was admitted to the intensive care unit at Houston Methodist Hospital, where he was sedated for a procedure to treat an acute respiratory problem stemming from pneumonia. He was later discharged on 30 January, after surgery successfully removed a blockage from his lungs. On April 14, 2017, Bush experienced a recurrence of pneumonia and was admitted to a Houston hospital. Bush turned 93 years old on June 12, 2017. On October 11, 2017, Bush surpassed Ronald Reagan, who was 93 years and 120 days at the time of his death on June 5, 2004, to become the second longest lived President. Should Bush live until November 26, 2017, he will become the longest lived United States President, surpassing Gerald Ford who passed away on December 26, 2006 aged 93 years and 165 days. Sexual misconduct allegations As part of the MeToo campaign, in late October 2017, actress Heather Lind accused Bush of inappropriately touching her and telling an inappropriate joke during an event promoting the TV series Turn Washingtons Spies . Lind wrote in an Instagram post that Bush touched me from behind from his wheelchair with his wife Barbara Bush by his side. He told me a dirty joke. And then, all the while being photographed, he touched me again. Her post was later deleted. Also in late October 2017, actress Jordana Grolnick said that Bush had groped her rear and told a dirty joke while she was being photographed with him and others. Slightly later in the month, also as part of the MeToo campaign, Christina Baker Kline penned an essay published by Slate magazine in which she accused Bush of inappropriately touching her and telling an inappropriate joke while she posed for a photo with him during an April 2014 event benefiting the Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy. She further stated that her chauffeur overheared her tell the story to her husband and requested that she remain discreet about the incident. After Klines accusation, former Maine Republican state Senate candidate Amanda Staples said in late October 2017 that Bush grabbed my butt and joked saying Oh, I m not THAT President, while she was visiting him at his home at Walkers point. After Staples accusation, Liz Allen, a former journalist and Erie City Council candidate, claimed that Bush behaved in a similar manner towards her in 2004, before he began using a wheelchair. A spokesman for Bush said, At age 93, President Bush has been confined to a wheelchair for roughly five years, so his arm falls on the lower waist of people with whom he takes pictures. To try to put people at ease, the president routinely tells the same joke and on occasion, he has patted womens rears in what he intended to be a goodnatured manner. Some have seen it as innocent others clearly view it as inappropriate. To anyone he has offended, President Bush apologizes most sincerely. Former First Lady of the United States, Laura Bush said of the incident, Im just sad that weve come to this. That was something that was very, very innocent that hes been accused of. But I know he would feel terrible. He would never hurt anybody. Electoral history See also List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience FileGHWBSPEECH.jpgBush delivers a eulogy to Ronald Reagan, June 11, 2004, in the Washington National Cathedral FileJPII on bier.jpgBush, along with President George W. Bush, First Lady Laura Bush, Bill Clinton, Condoleezza Rice, and Andrew Card pay their respects to Pope John Paul II before the popes funeral, 2005 FileGeorge H. W. Bush and George W. Bush with Hu Jintao.jpgGeorge H. W. Bush with son President George W. Bush and Chinas President Hu Jintao in Beijing, Peoples Republic of China, August 10, 2008 FileUS Navy 090109N7656T060 Capt. Kevin E. OFlaherty commanding officer of the aircraft carrier USS George H.W. Bush CVN 77 escorts former President George H.W. Bush.jpgCapt. Kevin E. OFlaherty, commanding officer of the aircraft carrier , escorts former President George H. W. Bush, 2009 FileBarack Obama and George H. W. Bush in the Oval Office.jpgBush meets President Barack Obama in the Oval Office, January 30, 2010 References Further reading Primary sources Jstor External links Official George Bush Presidential Library and Museum White House biography Speeches and statements Full audio of a number of Bush speeches Miller Center of Public Affairs Media coverage Other Extensive essays on Bush and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Life Portrait of George H. W. Bush, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , December 13, 1999 George H. W. Bush an American Experience documentary Category1924 births CategoryLiving people Category20thcentury American businesspeople Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury American writers Category21stcentury American writers CategoryActing Presidents of the United States CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to China CategoryAmerican aviators CategoryAmerican businesspeople in the oil industry CategoryAmerican male writers CategoryAmerican military personnel of World War II CategoryAmerican political writers CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryBohemian Club members CategoryBush family CategoryCold War CIA chiefs CategoryEli Lilly and Company CategoryFathers of Presidents of the United States CategoryGeorge H. W. Bush CategoryGrand Crosses Special Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany CategoryHonorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath CategoryLivingston family CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Texas CategoryMilitary personnel from Connecticut CategoryNational Rifle Association people CategoryPeople from Greenwich, Connecticut CategoryPeople from Kennebunkport, Maine CategoryPeople from Midland, Texas CategoryPeople from Milton, Massachusetts CategoryPeople with Parkinsons disease CategoryPermanent Representatives of the United States to the United Nations CategoryPhi Beta Kappa members CategoryPhillips Academy alumni CategoryPresidential Medal of Freedom recipients CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryReagan administration cabinet members CategoryRecipients of the Air Medal CategoryRecipients of the Distinguished Flying Cross CategoryRecipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class CategoryRecipients of the Order of the White Lion CategoryRepublican National Committee chairmen CategoryRepublican Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategoryRice University staff CategorySchuyler family CategoryShotdown aviators CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryTexas Republicans CategoryUnited States Navy pilots of World War II CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1980 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1988 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1992 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1980 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1984 CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryWhitney family of Connecticut CategoryWriters from Texas CategoryWorld Golf Hall of Fame inductees CategoryYale Bulldogs baseball players CategoryTexas AM MSC Student Conference on National Affairs FormerSpeakers
George Washington Act 1750, implemented in 1752, altered the official British dating method to the Gregorian calendar with the start of the year on January 1 . These changes resulted in dates being moved forward 11 days, and an advance of one year for those between January 1 and March 25. For a further explanation, see Old Style and New Style dates. , 1799 was an American statesman and soldier who served as the first President of the United States from 1789 to 1797 and was one of the Founding Fathers of the United States. He served as CommanderinChief of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War, and later presided over the 1787 convention that drafted the United States Constitution. He is popularly considered the driving force behind the nations establishment and came to be known as the father of the country, both during his lifetime and to this day. Washington was born into the provincial gentry of Colonial Virginia to a family of wealthy planters who owned tobacco plantations and slaves, which he inherited. In his youth, he became a senior officer in the colonial militia during the first stages of the French and Indian War. In 1775, the Second Continental Congress commissioned him as commanderinchief of the Continental Army in the American Revolution. In that command, Washington forced the British out of Boston in 1776 but was defeated and nearly captured later that year when he lost New York City. After crossing the Delaware River in the middle of winter, he defeated the British in two battles , retook New Jersey, and restored momentum to the Patriot cause. His strategy enabled Continental forces to capture two major British armies at Saratoga in 1777 and Yorktown in 1781. Historians laud Washington for the selection and supervision of his generals, preservation and command of the army, coordination with the Congress, state governors, and their militia, and attention to supplies, logistics, and training. In battle, however, Washington was sometimes outmaneuvered by British generals with larger armies, yet was always able to avoid significant defeats which would have resulted in the surrender of his army and the loss of the American Revolution. After victory had been finalized in 1783, Washington resigned as commanderinchief rather than seize power, proving his commitment to American republicanism. Washington presided over the Constitutional Convention in 1787, which devised a new form of federal government for the United States. Washington was widely admired for his strong leadership qualities and was unanimously elected president by the Electoral College in the first two national elections. Following his election as president in 1789, he worked to unify rival factions in the fledgling nation. He supported Alexander Hamiltons programs to satisfy all debts, federal and state, established a permanent seat of government, implemented an effective tax system, and created a national bank. In avoiding war with Great Britain, he guaranteed a decade of peace and profitable trade by securing the Jay Treaty in 1795, despite intense opposition from the Jeffersonians. He oversaw the creation of a strong, wellfinanced national government that maintained neutrality in the French Revolutionary Wars, suppressed the Whiskey Rebellion, and won wide acceptance amongst Americans. Washingtons incumbency established many precedents still in use today, such as the cabinet system, the inaugural address, and the title Mr. President. His retirement from office after two terms established a tradition that lasted until 1940 and was later made law by the 22nd Amendment. He remained nonpartisan, never joining the Federalist Party, although he largely supported its policies. Washingtons Farewell Address was an influential primer on civic virtue, warning against partisanship, sectionalism, and involvement in foreign wars. He retired from the presidency in 1797, returning to his home and plantation at Mount Vernon. Upon his death, Washington was eulogized as first in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen by Representative Henry Lee III of Virginia. He was revered in life and in death scholarly and public polling consistently ranks him among the top three presidents in American history. He has been depicted and remembered in monuments, public works, currency, and other dedications to the present day. Early life Washingtons birthplace George Washington was the first child of Augustine Washington and his second wife Mary Ball Washington , born on their Popes Creek Estate near presentday Colonial Beach in Westmoreland County, Virginia. He was born on February 11, 1731, according to the Julian calendar and Annunciation Style of enumerating years then in use in the British Empire. The Gregorian calendar was adopted within the British Empire in 1752, and it renders a birth date of February 22, 1732. Washington was of primarily English gentry descent, especially from Sulgrave, England. His greatgrandfather John Washington immigrated to Virginia in 1656 and began accumulating land and slaves, as did his son Lawrence and his grandson, Georges father Augustine. Augustine was a tobacco planter who also tried his hand in ironmanufacturing ventures. In Georges youth, the Washingtons were moderately prosperous members of the Virginia gentry, of middling rank rather than one of the leading planter families.Dorothy Twohig, in Six of Georges siblings reached maturity, including older halfbrothers Lawrence and Augustine, from his fathers first marriage to Jane Butler Washington, and full siblings Samuel, Elizabeth , John Augustine, and Charles. Three siblings died before adulthood his full sister Mildred died when she was about one, his halfbrother Butler died in infancy, and his halfsister Jane died at age twelve, when George was about two. His father died of a sudden illness in April 1743 when George was eleven years old, and his halfbrother Lawrence became a surrogate father and role model. William Fairfax was Lawrences fatherinlaw and the cousin of Virginias largest landowner Thomas, Lord Fairfax, and he was also a formative influence. William Fairfaxs son, George William Fairfax, was a close friend and associate of Washington. His, wife, Sally, was also a friend of Washington and an early romantic interest. While no evidence exists of a sexual affair between the two, Washington wrote Sally love letters even after she had married. Washingtons father was the Justice of the Westmoreland County Court. George spent much of his boyhood at Ferry Farm in Stafford County near Fredericksburg. Lawrence Washington inherited another family property from his father, a plantation on the Potomac River at Little Hunting Creek which he named Mount Vernon, in honor of his commanding officer, Vice Admiral Edward Vernon. George inherited Ferry Farm upon his fathers death and eventually acquired Mount Vernon after Lawrences death. 150pxThe Washington familyCoat of Arms. The death of his father prevented Washington from an education at Englands Appleby School such as his older brothers had received. He achieved the equivalent of an elementary school education from a variety of tutors, as well as from a school run by an Anglican clergyman in or near Fredericksburg. There was talk of securing an appointment for him in the Royal Navy when he was 15, but it was dropped when his widowed mother objected. In 1751, Washington traveled to Barbados with Lawrence, who was suffering from tuberculosis, with the hope that the climate would be beneficial to Lawrences health. Washington contracted smallpox during the trip, which left his face slightly scarred but immunized him against future exposures to the dreaded disease. Lawrences health failed to improve, and he returned to Mount Vernon where he died in the summer of 1752. Lawrences position as Adjutant General of Virginia was divided into four district offices after his death. Washington was appointed by Governor Dinwiddie as one of the four district adjutants in February 1753, with the rank of major in the Virginia militia. During this period, Washington became a Freemason while in Fredericksburg, although his involvement was minimal. Surveyor Washingtons introduction to surveying began at an early age through school exercises that taught him the basics of the profession, followed by practical experience in the field. His first experiences at surveying occurred in the territory surrounding Mount Vernon. His first opportunity as a surveyor occurred in 1748 when he was invited to join a survey party organized by his neighbor and friend George Fairfax of Belvoir. Fairfax organized a professional surveying party to lay out large tracts of land along the border of western Virginia, where the young Washington gained invaluable experience in the field.Mount Ladies Association, 2016 Washington began his career as a professional surveyor in 1749 at the age of 17. He subsequently received a commission and surveyors license from the College of William Mary and became the official surveyor for the newly formed Culpeper County. He was appointed to this wellpaid official position thanks to his brother Lawrences connection to the prominent Fairfax family. He completed his first survey in less than two days, plotting a 400acre parcel of land, and was well on his way to a promising career. He was subsequently able to purchase land in the Shenandoah Valley, the first of his many land acquisitions in western Virginia. For the next four years, Washington worked surveying land in Western Virginia and for the Ohio Company, a land investment company funded by Virginia investors. He came to the notice of the new lieutenant governor of Virginia Robert Dinwiddie, thanks to Lawrences position as commander of the Virginia militia. He was hard to miss at over six feet, he was taller than most of his contemporaries. In October 1750, Washington resigned his position as an official surveyor, though he continued to work diligently over the next three years at his new profession. He continued to survey professionally for two more years, mostly in Frederick County, before receiving a military appointment as adjutant for southern Virginia. By 1752, Washington completed close to 200 surveys on numerous properties totaling more than 60,000 acres. He continued to survey at different times throughout his life and as late as 1799. French and Indian War Washingtons map, accompanying his Journal to the Ohio Washington began his military service in the French and Indian War as a major in the militia of the British Province of Virginia. In 1753, he was sent as an ambassador from the British crown to the French officials and Indians as far north as presentday Erie, Pennsylvania. The Ohio Company was an important vehicle through which British investors planned to expand into the Ohio Valley, opening new settlements and trading posts for the Indian trade.. In 1753 the French began expanding their military control into the Ohio Country, a territory already claimed by the British colonies of Virginia and Pennsylvania. These competing claims led to a war in the colonies called the French and Indian War and contributed to the start of the global Seven Years War . By chance, Washington became involved in its beginning. Beginnings of War Deputy governor of colonial Virginia Robert Dinwiddie was ordered by the British government to guard the British territorial claims, including the Ohio River basin. In late 1753, Dinwiddie ordered Washington to deliver a letter asking the French to vacate the Ohio Valley he was eager to prove himself as the new adjutant general of the militia, appointed by the Lieutenant Governor himself only a year before. During his trip, Washington met with Tanacharison and other Iroquois chiefs allied with England at Logstown to secure their support in case of a military conflict with the French.In fact, Washington and Tanacharison became friends. He delivered the letter to local French commander Jacques Legardeur de SaintPierre, who politely refused to leave. Washington kept a diary during his expedition which was printed by William Hunter on Dinwiddies order and which made Washingtons name recognizable in Virginia. This increased popularity helped him to obtain a commission to raise a company of 100 men and start his military career. An engraving depicting the evening council of George Washington at Fort Necessity. Dinwiddie sent Washington back to the Ohio Country to safeguard an Ohio Companys construction of a fort at presentday Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Before he reached the area, a French force drove out colonial traders and began construction of Fort Duquesne. A small detachment of French troops led by Joseph Coulon de Jumonville was discovered by Tanacharison and a few warriors east of presentday Uniontown, Pennsylvania. On May 28, 1754, Washington and some of his militia unit, aided by their Mingo allies, ambushed the French in what has come to be called the Battle of Jumonville Glen. Exactly what happened during and after the battle is a matter of contention, but several primary accounts agree that the battle lasted about 15 minutes, that Jumonville was killed, and that most of his party were either killed or taken prisoner. It is not completely clear whether Jumonville died at the hands of Tanacharison in cold blood, or was somehow shot by an onlooker with a musket as he sat with Washington, or by another means. Following the battle, Washington was given the epithet Town Destroyer by Tanacharison. The French responded by attacking and capturing Washington at Fort Necessity in July 1754. They allowed him to return with his troops to Virginia. Historian Joseph Ellis concludes that the episode demonstrated Washingtons bravery, initiative, inexperience, and impetuosity. Upon his return to Virginia, Washington refused to accept a demotion to the rank of captain, and resigned his commission. Washingtons expedition into the Ohio Country had international consequences the French accused Washington of assassinating Jumonville, who they claimed was on a diplomatic mission. Both France and Great Britain were ready to fight for control of the region and both sent troops to North America in 1755 war was formally declared in 1756. Braddock disaster In 1755, Washington became the senior American aide to British General Edward Braddock on the illfated Braddock expedition. This was the largest British expedition to the colonies, and was intended to expel the French from the Ohio Country the first objective was the capture of Fort Duquesne. Washington initially sought an appointment as a major from Braddock, but he agreed to serve as a staff volunteer upon advice that no rank above captain could be given except by London. During the passage of the expedition, Washington fell ill with severe headaches and fever. He recommended to Braddock that the army be split into two divisions when the pace of the troops continued to slow a primary and more lightly equipped flying column offensive which could move at a more rapid pace, to be followed by a more heavily armed reinforcing division. Braddock accepted the recommendation and took command of the lead division. In the Battle of the Monongahela, the French and their Indian allies ambushed Braddocks reduced forces and the general was mortally wounded. After suffering devastating casualties, the British panicked and retreated in disarray. Washington rode back and forth across the battlefield, rallying the remnants of the British and Virginian forces into an organized retreat. In the process, he demonstrated bravery and stamina, despite his lingering illness. He had two horses shot from underneath him, while his hat and coat were pierced by several bullets. Twothirds of the British force of 976 men were killed or wounded in the battle. Washingtons conduct in the battle redeemed his reputation among many who had criticized his command in the Battle of Fort Necessity. Washington was not included by the succeeding commander Col. Thomas Dunbar in planning subsequent force movements, whatever responsibility rested on him for the defeat as a result of his recommendation to Braddock. Commander of Virginia Regiment Lt. Governor Dinwiddie rewarded Washington in 1755 with a commission as Colonel of the Virginia Regiment and Commander in Chief of all forces now raised in the defense of His Majestys Colony and gave him the task of defending Virginias frontier. The Virginia Regiment was the first fulltime American military unit in the colonies, as opposed to parttime militias and the British regular units. He was ordered to act defensively or offensively as he thought best. He happily accepted the commission, but the coveted red coat of officer rank continued to elude him. Dinwiddie as well pressed in vain for the British military to incorporate the Virginia Regiment into its ranks. In command of a thousand soldiers, Washington was a disciplinarian who emphasized training. He led his men in brutal campaigns against the Indians in the west his regiment fought 20 battles in 10 months and lost a third of its men. Washingtons strenuous efforts meant that Virginias frontier population suffered less than that of other colonies Ellis concludes that it was his only unqualified success in that war. In 1758, Washington participated in the Forbes Expedition to capture Fort Duquesne. He was embarrassed by a friendly fire episode in which his unit and another British unit each thought that the other was the French enemy and opened fire, with 14 dead and 26 wounded in the mishap. Washington was not involved in any other major fighting on the expedition, and the British scored a major strategic victory, gaining control of the Ohio Valley when the French abandoned the fort. Following the expedition, he retired from his Virginia Regiment commission in December 1758. He did not return to military life until the outbreak of the revolution in 1775. Lessons learned Washington never gained the commission in the British army that he yearned for, but in these years he gained valuable military, political, and leadership skills.. He closely observed British military tactics, gaining a keen insight into their strengths and weaknesses that proved invaluable during the Revolution. Washington learned to organize, train, drill, and discipline his companies and regiments. He learned the basics of battlefield tactics from his observations, readings, and conversations with professional officers, as well as a good understanding of problems of organization and logistics. He gained an understanding of overall strategy, especially in locating strategic geographical points. Washington demonstrated his resourcefulness and courage in the most difficult situations, including disasters and retreats. He developed a command presence, given his size, strength, stamina, and bravery in battle, which demonstrated to soldiers that he was a natural leader whom they could follow without question. Washingtons fortitude in his early years was sometimes manifested in less constructive ways. Biographer John R. Alden contends that Washington offered fulsome and insincere flattery to British generals in vain attempts to win great favor and on occasion showed youthful arrogance, as well as jealousy and ingratitude in the midst of impatience. Historian Ron Chernow is of the opinion that his frustrations in dealing with government officials during this conflict led him to advocate the advantages of a strong national government and a vigorous executive agency that could get results other historians tend to ascribe Washingtons position on government to his later American Revolutionary War service. He developed a very negative idea of the value of militia, who seemed too unreliable, too undisciplined, and too shortterm compared to regulars. On the other hand, his experience was limited to command of at most 1,000 men and came only in remote frontier conditions that were far removed from the urban situations that he faced during the Revolution at Boston, New York, Trenton, and Philadelphia. Between the wars Mount Vernon A mezzotint of Martha Washington, based on a 1757 portrait by Wollaston Washington expanded the estate at Mount Vernon after his marriage. On January 6, 1759, Washington married wealthy widow Martha Dandridge Custis, then 28 years old. Surviving letters suggest that he may have been in love at the time with Sally Fairfax, the wife of a friend. Nevertheless, George and Martha made a compatible marriage, because Martha was intelligent, gracious, and experienced in managing a planters estate. Together they raised her children from her previous marriage, John Parke Custis and Martha Parke Custis. Later, they raised Marthas grandchildren Eleanor Parke Custis and George Washington Parke Custis. George and Martha never had any children together his earlier bout with smallpox in 1751 may have made him sterile. The newlywed couple moved to Mount Vernon, near Alexandria, where he took up the life of a planter and political figure. Washingtons marriage to Martha greatly increased his property holdings and social standing, and made him one of Virginias wealthiest men. He acquired onethird of the Custis estate upon his marriage, worth approximately 100,000, and managed the remainder on behalf of Marthas children, for whom he sincerely cared. In 1754, Lieutenant Governor Dinwiddie had promised land bounties to the soldiers and officers who volunteered to serve during the French and Indian War. Washington prevailed upon Lord Botetourt, the new governor, and he finally fulfilled Dinwiddies promise in 1769 1770, with Washington subsequently receiving title to where the Kanawha River flows into the Ohio River, in what is now western West Virginia. He also frequently bought additional land in his own name. By 1775, Washington had doubled the size of Mount Vernon to , and had increased its slave population to over 100. As a respected military hero and large landowner, he held local office and was elected to the Virginia provincial legislature, representing Frederick County in the House of Burgesses for seven years beginning in 1758. In the 1758 election, he plied the voters with 170 gallons of rice punch, beer, wine, hard cider, and brandy, though he was largely absent while serving on the Forbes Expedition. With the help of several local elites, Washington won election with roughly forty percent of the vote, defeating three other candidates for the seat. Early in his legislative career, Washington rarely spoke, but he became a prominent critic of Britains taxation and mercantilist policies in the 1760s. Washington at the age of 40, 1772 Washington lived an aristocratic lifestyle fox hunting was a favorite leisure activity. He also enjoyed going to dances and parties, in addition to the theater, races, and cockfights. He also was known to play cards, backgammon, and billiards. Like most Virginia planters, he imported luxuries and other goods from England and paid for them by exporting his tobacco crop. By 1764, these luxuries, coupled with a poor tobacco market, left Washington 1,800 in debt. He began to pull himself out of debt in the mid1760s by diversifying his previously tobaccocentric business interests into other ventures and paying more attention to his affairs, especially in the form of buying fewer imported luxuries. In 1766, he started switching Mount Vernons primary cash crop away from tobacco to wheat, a crop that could be processed and then sold in various forms in the colonies, and further diversified operations to include flour milling, fishing, horse breeding, hog production, spinning, and weaving, and he erected a distillery for whiskey production which yielded more than 1,000 gallons a month. After a history of epileptic attacks, Patsy Custis died suddenly in Washingtons arms in 1773. The day following Patsys death, Washington wrote to Burwell Bassett It is an easier to conceive, than to describe, the distress of this Family, especially that of the unhappy Parent of our Dear Patcy Custis, when I inform you that yesterday re moved the Sweet, Innocent Girl into a more happy peaceful abode than any she has met with, the aflicted path she hitherto has trod. Washington cancelled all business activity and, for the next three months, was not away from Martha for a single night. Patsys death enabled Washington to pay off his British creditors, since half of her inheritance passed to him.Mount Vernon economy Washington was a successful planter of tobacco and wheat, and also a leader in the social elite in Virginia. From 1768 to 1775, he invited some 2,000 guests to his Mount Vernon estate, mostly those whom he considered people of rank. As for people not of high social status, his advice was to treat them civilly but keep them at a proper distance, for they will grow upon familiarity, in proportion as you sink in authority. In 1769, he became more politically active, presenting the Virginia Assembly with legislation to ban the importation of goods from Great Britain. American Revolution Washington played a leading military and political role in the American Revolution. His involvement began in 1767, when he first took political stands against the various acts of the British Parliament. He opposed the 1765 Stamp Act, the first direct tax on the colonies imposed by the British Parliament, which included no representatives from the colonies he began taking a leading role in the growing colonial resistance when protests became widespread against the Townshend Acts . In May 1769, he introduced a proposal, drafted by his friend George Mason and calling for Virginia to boycott English goods until the Acts were repealed. Parliament repealed the Townshend Acts in 1770. Washington regarded the passage of the Intolerable Acts in 1774 as an Invasion of our Rights and Privileges. He told friend Bryan Fairfax, I think the Parliament of Great Britain has no more right to put their hands in my pocket without my consent than I have to put my hands into yours for money. He also said that Americans must not submit to acts of tyranny till custom and use shall make us as tame and abject slaves, as the blacks we rule over with such arbitrary sway. In July 1774, he chaired the meeting at which the Fairfax Resolves were adopted, which called for the convening of a Continental Congress, among other things. In August, Washington attended the First Virginia Convention, where he was selected as a delegate to the First Continental Congress. Commander in Chief George Washington Oil on canvas painted by Charles Willson Peale, July 1776. Brooklyn Museum. The colonies went to war after the Battles of Lexington and Concord near Boston in April 1775. Washington appeared at the Second Continental Congress in a military uniform, signaling that he was prepared for war. He had the prestige, military experience, charisma, and military bearing of a military leader and was known as a strong patriot. Virginia was the largest colony and deserved recognition, and New England where the fighting began realized that it needed Southern support. Washington did not explicitly seek the office of commander and said that he was not equal to it, but there was no serious competition. Congress created the Continental Army on June 14, 1775. Washington was nominated by John Adams of Massachusetts, then appointed as a full General and Commanderinchief of the Continental Army.Contl Cong., Commission for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774 1789 96 97 .Contl Cong., Instructions for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774 1789 100 01 . Washingtons refusal to accept a salary earned him a reputation as a noble and disinterested commanding officer. The British then articulated the peril of Washington and his army on August 23, 1775, Britain issued a Royal proclamation labeling American Patriots as traitors. If they resorted to force, they faced confiscation of their property, and their leaders were subject to execution upon the scaffold. General George Washington at Trenton by John Trumbull, Yale University Art Gallery General Washington essentially assumed three roles during the war. First, he provided leadership of troops against the main British forces in 1775 77 and again in 1781. He lost many of his battles, but he never surrendered his army during the war, and he continued to fight the British relentlessly until the wars end. He plotted the overall strategy of the war, in cooperation with Congress. Second, he was charged with organizing and training the army. He recruited regulars and assigned Baron von Steuben to train them, a veteran of the Prussian general staff. The war effort and getting supplies to the troops were under the purview of Congress, but Washington pressured the Congress to provide the essentials. In June 1776, Congress first attempt at running the war effort was established with the committee known as Board of War and Ordnance, succeeded by the Board of War in July 1777, a committee which eventually included members of the military. The command structure of the armed forces was a hodgepodge of Congressional appointees with stateappointments filling the lower ranks. The results of his general staff were mixed, as some of his favorites never mastered the art of command. Eventually, he found capable officers, such as General Nathanael Greene, General Daniel Morgan , Colonel Henry Knox , and Colonel Alexander Hamilton . The American officers never equaled their opponents in tactics and maneuver, and consequently, they lost most of the pitched battles. The great successes at Boston , Saratoga , and Yorktown came from trapping the British far from base with much larger numbers of troops. Daniel Morgans annihilation of Banastre Tarletons legion of dragoons at Cowpens in February 1781 came as a result of Morgans employment of superior line tactics against his British opponent, resulting in one of the very few double envelopments in military history, another being Hannibals defeat of the Romans at Cannae in 216 BC. The decisive defeat of Col. Patrick Fergusons Tory Regiment at Kings Mountain demonstrated the superiority of the riflery of American overmountain men over Britishtrained troops armed with musket and bayonet. These overmountain men were led by a variety of elected officers, including the 66 William Campbell who had become one of Washingtons officers by the time of Yorktown. Similarly, Morgans Virginia riflemen proved themselves superior to the British at Saratoga, a postrevolutionary war development being the creation of trained rifle battalions in the European armies. Washingtons third and most important role in the war effort was the embodiment of armed resistance to the Crown, the representative man of the Revolution. His longterm strategy was to maintain an army in the field at all times, and eventually this strategy worked. His enormous personal and political stature and his political skills kept Congress, the army, the French, the militias, and the states all pointed toward a common goal. Furthermore, he permanently established the principle of civilian supremacy in military affairs by voluntarily resigning his commission and disbanding his army when the war was won, rather than declaring himself monarch. He also helped overcome the distrust of a standing army by his constant reiteration that welldisciplined professional soldiers counted for twice as much as erratic militias. Victory at Boston Washington taking Control of the Continental Army, 1775. Washington assumed command of the Continental Army in the field at Cambridge, Massachusetts in July 1775 during the ongoing siege of Boston. He recognized his armys desperate shortage of gunpowder and sought new sources. American troops raided British arsenals, including some in the Caribbean, and some manufacturing was attempted. They obtained a barely adequate supply by the end of 1776, mostly from France. Washington reorganized the army during the long standoff in Boston and forced the British to withdraw by putting artillery on Dorchester Heights overlooking the city. The British evacuated Boston in March 1776 and Washington moved his army to New York City. British newspapers disparaged most of the Patriots, but praised Washingtons personal character and qualities as a military commander despite his opposition to Britain, which some believed would ruin the empire. Defeat at New York In August 1776, British General William Howe launched a massive naval and land campaign designed to seize New York. Many of Washingtons generals preferred retreating from the city and engaging in a defensive strategy, but he believed it better to engage in a major pitched battle. The Continental Army under Washington engaged the enemy for the first time as an army of the United States at the Battle of Long Island, the largest battle of the entire war. The Americans were heavily outnumbered, many men deserted, and Washington was badly defeated. He and his generals determined on a course of retreat, and Washington instructed General William Heath to make available every flatbottom riverboat and sloop in the area. In little time, Washingtons army crossed the East River safely under the cover of darkness to Manhattan Island and did so without loss of life or materiel. Washington had considered abandoning the island and Fort Washington, but he heeded Generals Greene and Putnams recommendation to attempt a defense of the fort. He belatedly retreated farther across the Hudson to Fort Lee to avoid encirclement. With the Americans in retreat, Howe was able to take the offensive he landed his troops on the island on November 16 and surrounded and captured Fort Washington, resulting in high Continental casualties. Biographer Alden claims that although Washington was responsible for the decision to delay the patriots retreat, he tried to ascribe blame for the decision to defend Fort Washington to the wishes of Congress and the bad advice of Nathaniel Greene. Crossing the Delaware Washington Crossing the Delaware , December 25, 1776, by Emanuel Leutze, 1851 Washington then continued his flight across New Jersey the future of the Continental Army was in doubt due to expiring enlistments and the string of losses. On the night of December 25, 1776, he led his army across the Delaware River. The next morning, the troops launched a surprise attack on a Hessian outpost in Trenton, New Jersey, capturing nearly 1,000 prisoners. Washington followed up his victory at Trenton with another over British regulars at Princeton on January 3. The British retreated to New York City and its environs, which they held until the peace treaty of 1783. Washingtons victories wrecked the British carrotandstick strategy of showing overwhelming force then offering generous terms. The Americans would not negotiate for anything short of independence. These victories alone were not enough to ensure ultimate Patriot victory, however, since many soldiers did not reenlist or deserted during the harsh winter. Washington and Congress reorganized the army with increased rewards for staying and punishment for desertion, which raised troop numbers effectively for subsequent battles. In February 1777 while encamped at Morristown, New Jersey, Washington became convinced that only smallpox inoculation by variolation would prevent the destruction of his Army. He ordered the inoculation of all troops and, by some reports, death by smallpox in the ranks dropped from 17 of all deaths to 1 of all deaths. Historians debate whether Washington preferred to fight major battles or to utilize a Fabian strategy to harass the British with quick, sharp attacks followed by a retreat so that the larger British army could not catch him. His southern commander Greene did use Fabian tactics in 1780 81 Washington did so only in fall 1776 to spring 1777, after losing New York City and seeing much of his army melt away. Trenton and Princeton were Fabian examples. By summer 1777 Washington had rebuilt his strength and his confidence he stopped using raids and went for largescale confrontations, as at Brandywine, Germantown, Monmouth, and Yorktown. 1777 campaigns In late summer of 1777, British General John Burgoyne led a major invasion army south from Quebec, with the intention of splitting off rebellious New England. But General Howe in New York took his army south to Philadelphia instead of going up the Hudson River to join with Burgoyne near Albany a major strategic mistake. Meanwhile, Washington rushed to Philadelphia to engage Howe, while closely following the action in upstate New York, where the patriots were led by General Philip Schuyler and his successor Horatio Gates. The ensuing pitched battles at Philadelphia were too complex for Washingtons relatively inexperienced men and they were defeated. At the Battle of Brandywine on September 11, 1777, Howe outmaneuvered Washington and marched into the American capital at Philadelphia unopposed on September 26. Washingtons army unsuccessfully attacked the British garrison at Germantown in early October. Meanwhile, to the north, Burgoyne was beyond the reach of help from Howe, trapped and forced to surrender after the Battles of Saratoga. This was a major turning point militarily and diplomatically the French responded to Burgoynes defeat by entering the war, allying with America and expanding the Revolutionary War into a major worldwide affair. Washingtons loss at Philadelphia prompted some members of Congress to consider removing Washington from command. This movement termed the Conway Cabal, failed after Washingtons supporters rallied behind him. Biographer Alden relates, it was inevitable that the defeats of Washingtons forces and the concurrent victory of the forces in upper New York should be compared. The zealous admiration of Washington indeed inevitably waned. John Adams was never a fan of the southern delegation to the Continental Congress, and he wrote that Congress will appoint a thanksgiving and one cause of it ought to be that the glory of turning the tide of arms is not immediately due to the commanderinchief nor to southern troops. If it had been, idolatry and adulation would have been unbounded.... Now we can allow a certain citizen to be wise, virtuous, and good, without thinking him a deity or a savior. Valley Forge General Washington and Lafayette look over the troops at Valley Forge. Washingtons army of 11,000 went into winter quarters at Valley Forge north of Philadelphia in December 1777. Over the next six months, the deaths in camp numbered in the thousands, the majority being from disease, compounded by lack of food and proper clothing, poor shelter, and the extreme cold. Historians death toll estimates range from 2,000 to over 3,000 men. The British were comfortably quartered in Philadelphia and paid for their supplies in sterling. In contrast, Washington had difficulty procuring supplies from the few farmers in the area who would not accept rapidly depreciating American paper currency, while the woodlands about the valley had soon been exhausted of game. As conditions worsened, Washington was faced with the task of maintaining morale and discouraging desertion, which had become common by February. Washington had repeatedly petitioned the Continental Congress for badly needed provisions but with no success. Finally, on January 24, 1778, five Congressmen came to Valley Forge to examine the conditions of the Continental Army. Washington expressed the urgency of the situation, exclaiming, Something must be done. Important alterations must be made. At this time, he also contended that Congress should take control of the army supply system, pay for its supplies, and promptly expedite them as they became necessary. In response to Washingtons urgent appeal, Congress gave full support to funding the supply lines of the army, which also resulted in reorganizing the commissary department, which controlled gathering the supplies for the army. By late February, there were adequate supplies flowing throughout camp. The next spring, a revitalized army emerged from Valley Forge in good order, thanks in part to a fullscale training program supervised by General von Steuben. The British evacuated Philadelphia for New York in June, 1778. Washington summoned a council of war with Generals Lee, Greene, and Wayne and Lafayette, and he decided to make a partial attack on the retreating British at the Battle of Monmouth. The British were commanded by Sir Henry Clinton, Howes successor. On June 28, Lee and Lafayette moved with 4,000 men. Without Washingtons immediate knowledge they attempted to launch but bungled the first attack at the British rear guard. Clinton came about and offered stiff resistance, also with 4,000 men and waiting in anticipation, keeping the Americans in check. After sharp words of criticism, Washington relieved Lee and continued fighting to an effective draw in one of the wars largest battles. When nightfall came, the fighting came to a stop and the British continued their retreat and headed towards New York, where Washington soon moved his army just outside the city. Sullivan Expedition In the summer of 1779, Washington and Congress decided to strike the Iroquois warriors of the Six Nations in a campaign to force Britains Indian allies out of New York, which they had used as a base to attack American settlements around New England. In June 1779, the Indian warriors joined with Tory rangers led by Colonel William Butler and slew over 200 frontiersmen, using barbarities normally shunned, and laid waste to the Wyoming Valley in Pennsylvania. One British officer who witnessed the Tory brutality said that the redcoats on return to England would scalp every son of a bitch of them. In August 1779, General John Sullivan led a military operation that destroyed at least 40 Iroquois villages, burning all available crops. Few people were killed as the Indians fled to British protection in Canada. Sullivan later reported that the immediate objects of this expedition are accomplished, viz total ruin of the Indian settlements and the destruction of their crops, which were designed for the support of those inhuman barbarians. Hudson River and Southern battles Washington at this time moved his headquarters from Middlebrook in New Jersey up to New Windsor on the Hudson, with an army of 10,000. The British, led by Clinton, made a move up the Hudson against American posts at Verplancks Point and Stony Point, and both places succumbed but a counteroffensive was briefly successful by the patriots led by General Anthony Wayne. Clinton was able to shut off Kings Ferry in the end, but it was a strategic loss he could proceed no farther up the river due to American fortifications and Washingtons army. The skirmishes at Verplancks Point and at Stony Point demonstrated that the continental infantry had become quite formidable and were an enormous boost to morale. Washington went into quarters at Morristown during the winter of 1779 1780, which represented the worst suffering for the army during the war. The temperatures fell to 16 below zero, the New York Harbor was frozen over, and snow and ice covered the ground for weeks, with the troops again lacking provisions for a time as at Valley Forge. In late 1779, Clinton moved his forces south to Charleston for an offensive against the patriots led by Benjamin Lincoln. After his success there, Clinton returned victorious to New York, leaving Cornwallis in the south. Congress replaced Lincoln with Gates, despite Washingtons recommendation of Greene. Gates failed in South Carolina and was then replaced by Greene. The British at the time seemed to have the South almost in their grasp. Despite this news, Washington was encouraged to learn in mid1780 that Lafayette had returned from France with additional naval assets and forces. Arnolds treason A page from the Culper Rings codebook, listing the men whom Washington gathered to be agents In the summer of 1778, George Washington ordered Major Benjamin Tallmadge to form the Culper Ring. This group was composed of a select few trustworthy individuals whose purpose was to collect information about the British movements and activities in New York City. The Ring is famous for uncovering Benedict Arnolds intentions of treason, which shocked Washington because Arnold was someone who had contributed significantly to the war effort. Arnold was embittered by his dealings with Congress over rank and finances, as well as the alliance with France, so he conspired with the British in a plan to seize the post that he commanded at West Point. Washington just missed apprehending him, but did capture his coconspirator Major John Andr, a British intelligence officer under Clinton who was hanged by order of a courtmartial called by Washington. Difficulties during the winter of 1780 1781 Washingtons army went into winter quarters at New Windsor in 1780 and suffered again for lack of supplies. Washington prevailed upon Congress as well as state officials to come to their aid with provisions. He sympathized with their suffering, saying that he hoped that the army would not continue to struggle under the same difficulties they have hitherto endured, which I cannot help remarking seem to reach the bounds of human patience. Victory at Yorktown General Washington and the comte de Rochambeau at Yorktown by Auguste Couder, 1836. In July 1780, 5,000 veteran French troops led by the comte de Rochambeau arrived at Newport, Rhode Island to aid in the war. French naval forces then landed, led by Admiral Franois Joseph Paul de Grasse. At first Washington hoped to bring the allied fight to New York and to end the war there, but Rochambeau advised de Grasse that Cornwallis in Virginia was the better target. Admiral de Grasse followed this advice and arrived off the Virginia coast. Washington immediately saw the advantage created, made a feinting move with his force towards Clinton in New York, and then headed south to Virginia. Washingtons Continental Army, also newly funded by 20,000 in French gold, delivered the final blow to the British in 1781, after a French naval victory allowed American and French forces to trap a British army in Virginia, preventing reinforcement by Clinton from the North. The surrender at Yorktown on October 19, 1781, marked the end of major fighting in North America. . Cornwallis failed to appear at the official surrender ceremony, and sent General Charles OHara as his proxy Washington then had General Benjamin Lincoln accept the surrender in his place. Demobilization Substantial combat had ended but the war had not, and a formal treaty of peace was months away. The British still had 26,000 troops occupying New York City, Charleston, and Savannah, and had a powerful fleet. The French army and navy departed, so the Americans were on their own in 1782 83. Money matters fed the anxiety the treasury was empty, and the unpaid soldiers were growing restive almost to the point of mutiny. At one point, they forced an adjournment of the Congress from Philadelphia to Princeton. Washington dispelled unrest among officers by suppressing the Newburgh Conspiracy in March 1783, and Congress came up with the promise of a fiveyear bonus. General George Washington Resigning His Commission by John Trumbull, Capitol Rotunda . With the initial peace treaty articles ratified in April 1783, a recently formed Congressional committee under Hamilton was considering needs and plans for a peacetime army. On May 2, 1783, the Commander in Chief submitted his Sentiments on a Peace Establishment to the Committee, essentially providing an official Continental Army position. The original proposal was defeated in Congress in two votes , with a truncated version also being rejected in April 1784. By the Treaty of Paris signed on September 3, 1783, Great Britain recognized the independence of the United States. Washington disbanded his army and gave an eloquent farewell address to his soldiers on November 2. On November 25, the British evacuated New York City, and Washington and the governor took possession. At Fraunces Tavern on December 4, Washington formally bade his officers farewell and he resigned his commission as commanderinchief on December 23, 1783, to the Continental Congress in the Old Senate Chamber of the Maryland State House in Annapolis, Md. I consider it an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my official life, by commending the interests of our dearest country to the protection of Almighty God, and those who have the superintendence of them, to his holy keeping. Historian Gordon Wood concludes that the greatest act in his life was his resignation as commander of the armies. King George III called Washington the greatest character of the age because of this. Washington later submitted a formal account of the expenses that he had personally advanced the army over the eightyear conflict of about 450,000. It is said to have been detailed regarding small items and vague concerning large ones, and included the expenses incurred from Marthas visits to his headquarters, as well as his compensation for service none of which had been drawn during the war. Constitutional Convention Signing of the U.S. Constitution by Howard Chandler Christy, 1940 Washingtons retirement to personal business at Mount Vernon was shortlived. He made an exploratory trip to the western frontier in 1784 and inspected his land holdings in Western Pennsylvania that had been earned decades earlier for his service in the French and Indian War. There he confronted squatters, including David Reed and the Covenanters they vacated, but only after losing a court decision heard in Washington, Pennsylvania in 1786. He also facilitated the creation of the Potomac Company, a public private partnership that sought to link the Potomac River with the Ohio River, but technical and financial challenges rendered the company unprofitable. After much reluctance, he was persuaded to attend the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia during the summer of 1787 as a delegate from Virginia, where he was unanimously elected as president of the Convention. He held considerable criticism of the Articles of Confederation of the thirteen colonies, for the weak central government which it established, referring to the Articles as no more than a rope of sand to support the new nation. Washingtons view for the need of a strong federal government grew out of the recent war, as well as the inability of the Continental Congress to rally the states to provide for the needs of the military, as was clearly demonstrated for him during the winter at Valley Forge. The general populace, however, did not share Washingtons views of a strong federal government binding the states together, comparing such a prevailing entity to the British Parliament that previously ruled and taxed the colonies. Washingtons participation in the debates was minor, although he cast his vote when called upon his prestige facilitated the collegiality and productivity of the delegates. After a couple of months into the task, Washington told Alexander Hamilton, I almost despair of seeing a favorable issue to the proceedings of our convention and do therefore repent having had any agency in the business. Following the Convention, his support convinced many, but not all of his colleagues, to vote for ratification. He unsuccessfully lobbied antifederalist Patrick Henry, saying that the adoption of it under the present circumstances of the Union is in my opinion desirable he declared that the only alternative would be anarchy. Nevertheless, he did not consider it appropriate to cast his vote in favor of adoption for Virginia, since he was expected to be nominated president under it. The new Constitution was subsequently ratified by all thirteen states. The delegates to the convention designed the presidency with Washington in mind, allowing him to define the office by establishing precedent once elected.National Park Service, 2011 Washington thought that the achievements were monumental once they were finally completed. Presidency Lansdowne portrait , painted by Gilbert Stuart in 1796 The Electoral College unanimously elected Washington as the first president in 1789 and again in 1792. He remains the only president to receive the totality of electoral votes. John Adams received the next highest vote total and was elected vice president. Washington was inaugurated on April 30, 1789, taking the first presidential oath of office on the balcony of Federal Hall in New York City. The oath was administered by Chancellor Robert R. Livingston I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States and will, to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States. Historian John R. Alden indicates that Washington added the words so help me God. The 1st United States Congress voted to pay Washington a salary of 25,000 a year a large sum in 1789, valued at about 340,000 in 2015 dollars. Washington faced financial troubles then, yet he initially declined the salary. At the urging of Congress, he ultimately accepted the payment to avoid setting a precedent whereby the presidency would be perceived as limited only to independently wealthy individuals who could serve without any salary. He was aware that everything which he did set a precedent, and he attended carefully to the pomp and ceremony of office, making sure that the titles and trappings were suitably republican and never emulated European royal courts. To that end, he preferred the title Mr. President to the more majestic names proposed by the Senate. Washington proved an able administrator and established many precedents in the functions of the presidency, including messages to Congress and the cabinet form of government. He set the standard for tolerance of opposition voices, despite fears that a democratic system would lead to political violence, and he conducted a smooth transition of power to his successor. He was an excellent delegator and judge of talent and character he talked regularly with department heads and listened to their advice before making a final decision. In handling routine tasks, he was systematic, orderly, energetic, solicitous of the opinion of others ... but decisive, intent upon general goals and the consistency of particular actions with them. After reluctantly serving a second term, Washington refused to run for a third, establishing the tradition of a maximum of two terms for a president which was solidified by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison. During his first term in office, Washington had to contend with major problems, old and new. The United States was not completely unified North Carolina and Rhode Island had not yet formally joined the Union, and the status was uncertain of the independent Vermont Republic. Great Britain refused to relinquish its forts in the American West. Additionally, the United States Army was minuscule and the United States Navy did not exist. The old Confederation lacked the powers to handle the needed workload. It had weak leadership, no executive, a small bureaucracy of clerks, a large debt, worthless paper money, and no taxing power. Cabinet Congress created executive departments during Washingtons first months in office in 1789, including the State Department on July 27, the Department of War in early August, and the Treasury Department on September 2. The President also received two additional officers without departments the Attorney General and Postmaster General. Washington appointed Richmond lawyer Edmund Randolph as Attorney General and Samuel Osgood as Postmaster General. He also appointed fellow Virginian Thomas Jefferson to be Secretary of State and Henry Knox as Secretary of War. Finally, he appointed Alexander Hamilton to head the Treasury Department. Washingtons cabinet eventually developed into a consultation and advisory body, although this was not mandated by the Constitution. During Washingtons administration, the President was given broad powers for removing officials in the executive branch. Congress passed a bill sponsored by James Madison that gave the President the power to remove public officials whose appointments mandated Senatorial approval. In 1789, Vice President John Adams cast the deciding vote in the Senate against a bill that would have mandated senatorial consent for the removal of Senateconfirmed federal and cabinet appointments. The bill had been sponsored by Pennsylvania Senator William Maclay. Washingtons cabinet members were known for their dissension, forming rival parties, and having sharply divided views, the most fierce between Hamilton and Jefferson. Jefferson described his relationship with Hamilton as being daily pitted... like two cocks. Knox almost always sided with Hamilton, while Randolph tried to remain neutral but tended to side more with Jefferson, his fellow Virginian. Washington restricted cabinet discussions to topics of his own choosing, without participating in debate. He occasionally requested cabinet opinions in writing, and he expected his department heads to carry out his decisions without complaint. Domestic issues George Washington by Rembrandt Peale, De Young Museum Washington was not a member of any political party and hoped that they would not be formed, fearing conflict that would undermine republicanism. His closest advisors formed two factions, setting the framework for the future First Party System. Secretary of Treasury Alexander Hamilton had bold plans to establish the national credit and to build a financially powerful nation, and he formed the basis of the Federalist Party. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson was the founder of the Jeffersonian Republicans, and he strenuously opposed Hamiltons agenda. Washington typically favored Hamilton over Jefferson, and it was Hamiltons agenda that went into effect. Jeffersons political actions, his support of Philip Freneaus National Gazette , and his attempt to undermine Hamilton nearly led George Washington to dismiss him from his cabinet, though he ultimately left the cabinet voluntarily. Washington never forgave him and never spoke to him again. In early 1790, Hamilton devised a plan with the approval of Washington, culminating in The Residence Act of 1790, that established the creditworthiness of the new government, as well as its permanent location. Congress had previously issued almost 22 million to suppliers in certificates of debt during the war some of the states had incurred debt, as well . In accordance with the plan, Congress authorized the assumption and payment of these debts, and provided funding through customs duties and excise taxes. The proposal was largely favored in the North and opposed in the South. Hamilton obtained the approval of the southern states in exchange for an agreement to place the new national capitol on the Potomac River. The national debt increased as a result during Hamiltons service as Secretary of the Treasury, but the nation established its good credit. Many in the Congress and elsewhere in the government profited from trading in the debt paper which was assumed. Many of Washingtons fellow Virginians and others were vexed by this, but he considered that they had adequate redress through their Congressional representatives. The Revenue Act authorized the president to select the specific location on the Potomac River for the seat of the government. He was to appoint three commissioners to survey and acquire property for it, and Washington personally oversaw this effort throughout his term in office. In 1791, the commissioners named the permanent seat of government The City of Washington in the Territory of Columbia to honor Washington. In 1800, the Territory of Columbia became the District of Columbia when the federal government moved to the site, according to the provisions of the Residence Act. In 1791, Congress imposed an excise tax on distilled spirits, partly as a result of the Copper Panic of 1789, and this led to protests in frontier districts, especially Pennsylvania. Washington ordered the protesters to appear in U.S. district court, but the protests turned into fullscale defiance of federal authority in 1794 known as the Whiskey Rebellion. The federal army was too small to be used, so Washington invoked the Militia Act of 1792 to summon militias from Pennsylvania, Virginia, Maryland, and New Jersey. The governors sent the troops, with Washington taking initial command. He subsequently named Henry Lighthorse Harry Lee as field commander to lead the troops into the rebellious districts. The rebels dispersed and there was no fighting, as Washingtons forceful action proved that the new government could protect itself. This represented the premier instance of the federal government using military force to exert authority over the states and citizens and is also the only time that a sitting U.S. president personally commanded troops in the field. Foreign affairs Miniature Portrait of Washington by Robert Field . In April 1792, the French Revolutionary Wars broke out between Great Britain and its allies and revolutionary France Washington, with cabinet approval, proclaimed American neutrality. The revolutionary government of France sent diplomat EdmondCharles Gent to America, called Citizen Gent. He was welcomed with great enthusiasm and began promoting the case for France, using a network of new Democratic Societies in major cities. He even issued French letters of marque and reprisal to French ships manned by American sailors so that they could capture British merchant ships. Washington denounced the societies and demanded that the French government recall Gent, which they did. Hamilton formulated the Jay Treaty to normalize trade relations with Great Britain, remove them from western forts, and resolve financial debts remaining from the Revolution John Jay negotiated and signed the treaty on November 19, 1794. Jeffersonians supported France and strongly attacked the treaty. Washington listened to both sides, then announced his strong support, which mobilized public opinion and was pivotal in securing ratification in the Senate on June 24, 1795 by the requisite twothirds majority. The British agreed to depart from their forts around the Great Lakes, and the United StatesCanada boundary had to be readjusted. Numerous preRevolutionary debts were liquidated, and the British opened their West Indies colonies to American trade. Most importantly, the treaty delayed war with Great Britain and instead brought a decade of prosperous trade. The treaty angered the French and became a central issue in many political debates. Relations with France deteriorated after the treaty was signed, leaving succeeding president John Adams with the prospect of war. Farewell Address Washingtons Farewell Address Washingtons Farewell Address was issued as a public letter in 1796 and was one of the most influential statements of republicanism, drafted primarily by Washington himself with help from Hamilton. It gives advice on the necessity and importance of national union, the value of the Constitution and the rule of law, the evils of political parties, and the proper virtues of a republican people. He referred to morality as a necessary spring of popular government, and said, Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure, reason, and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle.Library of Congress, 2011 The address warned against foreign influence in domestic affairs and American meddling in European affairs, and against bitter partisanship in domestic politics. He also called for men to move beyond partisanship and serve the common good. He cautioned against permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world, saying that the United States must concentrate primarily on American interests. He counseled friendship and commerce with all nations, but advised against involvement in European wars and entering into longterm entangling alliances, while advancing the general idea of noninvolvement in foreign affairs. The Farewell Address made no clear distinction between domestic and foreign policies John Quincy Adams interpreted Washingtons policy as advocating a strong nationalist foreign policy while not limiting Americas international activities. The address quickly set American values regarding foreign affairs. Washingtons policy of noninvolvement in the foreign affairs of the Old World was largely embraced by the founding generation of American statesmen, including John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, and James Madison. Retirement A map of the Mount Vernon plantation and lands. Washington retired from the presidency in March 1797 and returned to Mount Vernon with a profound sense of relief. He devoted much time to his plantations and other business interests, including his distillery, which produced its first batch of spirits in February 1797. Chernow explains that his plantation operations were only minimally profitable His lands in the west yielded little income because they were under attack by Indians, and the squatters living there refused to pay him rent. Washington attempted to sell off these holdings but failed to obtain the price that he desired. Meanwhile, he was losing money at Mount Vernon due to a glut of unproductive slaves, which he declined to sell due to a desire to keep families intact. In addition, some of the slaves belonged to Martha, but the groups had been living together for years and there had been much intermarriage among them. Most Americans assumed that he was rich because of the wellknown glorified faade of wealth and grandeur at Mount Vernon, but nearly all of Washingtons wealth was tied up in land or slaves. Historians estimate that his estate was worth about 1million in 1799 dollars, equivalent to about 19.9million in 2014 purchasing power. Purchasing power was calculated at By 1798, relations with France had deteriorated to the point that war seemed imminent. President Adams offered Washington a commission as lieutenant general on July 4, 1798, and as Commanderinchief of the armies raised or to be raised for service in a prospective war. He accepted and served as the senior officer of the United States Army from July 13, 1798, until his death seventeen months later. He participated in the planning for a Provisional Army to meet any emergency that might arise but avoided involvement in details as much as possible. He delegated most of the work, including active leadership of the army, to Hamilton, who was then serving as a major general in the U.S. Army. No French army invaded the United States during this period, and Washington did not assume a field command. American Cincinnatus During the Revolutionary and Early Republican periods of American history, many commentators compared Washington with Roman aristocrat and statesman Cincinnatus. The comparison arose as Washington, like Cincinnatus, commanded the Continental Army only until the British had been defeated. Thereafter, he returned as quickly as possible to cultivating his lands instead of seeking great political power. Poet Philip Freneau remarked on Washingtons resignation in December 1783 and his decision to retire to Mount Vernon Thus He, whom Romes proud legions swayd Returnd, and sought his sylvan shade. Lord Byrons Ode to Napoleon also lionized Washington as the Cincinnatus of the West. Death On Thursday, December 12, 1799, Washington spent several hours inspecting his plantation on horseback, in snow, hail, and freezing rain that evening, he ate his supper without changing from his wet clothes. He awoke the next morning with a severe sore throat and became increasingly hoarse as the day progressed, yet still rode out in the heavy snow, marking trees for cutting on the plantation. Some time around 3a.m. that Saturday, he suddenly awoke with severe difficulty breathing and almost completely unable to speak or swallow. He was a firm believer in bloodletting, which was a standard medical practice of that era, and he had used it to treat various ailments of slaves on his plantation. He ordered estate overseer Albin Rawlins to remove nearly a pint of his blood. Three physicians were summoned, including Washingtons personal physician Dr. James Craik, along with Dr. Gustavus Brown and Dr. Elisha Dick. Craik and Brown thought that Washington had quinsey or quincy, while Dick thought that the condition was more serious or a violent inflammation of the throat. By the time that the three physicians finished their treatments and bloodletting of the president, half or more of his total blood content was removed over the course of just a few hours. Dick recognized that the bloodletting and other treatments were failing, and he proposed performing an emergency tracheotomy as a lastditch effort to save Washingtons life. Few American doctors were then familiar with this procedure and the other two doctors disapproved. Washington died at home around 10p.m. on Saturday, December 14, 1799, aged 67. In his journal, Tobias Lear recorded Washingtons last words as Tis well. A funeral was held on December 18, 1799 at Mount Vernon, where Washingtons body was interred. Congress passed a joint resolution to construct a marble monument for his body in the planned crypt below the rotunda of the center section of the Capitol , a plan acquiesced to by Martha. In December 1800, the House passed an appropriations bill for 200,000 to build the mausoleum, which was to be a pyramid with a square base. Southern representatives and senators opposed the plan and defeated the measure because they felt that it was best to have Washingtons body remain at Mount Vernon. Published regulations for the funeral procession in honor of Washington Throughout the world, people admired Washington and were saddened by his death. In the United States, memorial processions were held in major cities and thousands wore mourning clothes for months. Martha Washington wore a black mourning cape for one year. In France, First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte ordered ten days of mourning throughout the country. Ships of the British Royal Navys Channel Fleet lowered their flags to half mast to honor his passing.Parsons, Eugene. George Washington A Character Sketch , p. 112. H. G. Campbell, 1898. To protect their privacy, Martha Washington burned the correspondence which they had exchanged only five letters between the couple are known to have survived, two letters from Martha to George and three from him to her. Subsequent diagnoses The diagnosis of Washingtons final illness and the immediate cause of his death have been subjects of debate since the day he died. Medical report. In the days immediately following his death, Craik and Dicks published account stated that they felt that his symptoms had been consistent with cynanche trachealis , a term of that period used to describe severe inflammation of the structures of the upper airway. Even at that early date, there were accusations of medical malpractice, with some believing that Washington had been bled to death. Various modern medical authors have speculated that Washington probably died from a severe case of epiglottitis which was complicated by the given treatments , most notably the massive deliberate blood loss, which almost certainly caused hypovolemic shock. Move to new burial site In 1830 a disgruntled exemployee of the estate attempted to steal Washingtons skull from the original tomb. The next year a new vault was constructed at Mount Vernon to receive George and Martha Washingtons remains, along with other relatives buried in the original tomb. A joint Congressional committee debated the removal of President Washingtons body from Mount Vernon to a crypt in the Capitol in early 1832. The crypt was built by architect Charles Bulfinch in the 1820s during the reconstruction of the burnedout capitol after the British had set it afire in August 1814, during the Burning of Washington. Southern opposition was intense, antagonized by an evergrowing rift between North and South. Congressman Wiley Thompson of Georgia expressed the Southerners fear when he said, Remove the remains of our venerated Washington from their association with the remains of his consort and his ancestors, from Mount Vernon and from his native State, and deposit them in this capitol, and then let a severance of the Union occur, and behold the remains of Washington on a shore foreign to his native soil. The Washington family tomb at Mount Vernon . The sarcophagi of George and Martha Washington at the entrance to the Washington family tomb . On October 7, 1837 George Washingtons remains, still in the original lead coffin, were placed within a marble sarcophagus designed by William Strickland and constructed by John Struthers. The sarcophagus was sealed and encased with planks while an outer vault was constructed around it. The outer vault contains the sarcophagi of George and Martha Washington, the inner vault contains the remains of other Washington family members and relatives. Personal life The Washington Family by Edward Savage, painted between 1789 and 1796, shows George Washington Parke Custis, George Washington, Eleanor Parke Custis, Martha Washington, and an enslaved servant, probably William Lee or Christopher Sheels. As a young man, Washington had red hair. A popular myth is that he wore a wig, as was the fashion among some at the time. Washington did not wear a wig. Instead, he powdered his hair, as is represented in several portraits, including the wellknown, unfinished Gilbert Stuart depiction called the Athenaeum Portrait. Washingtons height was variously recorded as to . He registered six feet three and onehalf inches when measured for his coffin. He had unusually great physical strength that amazed younger men. Jefferson called Washington the best horseman of his age, and both American and European observers praised his riding. The horsemanship benefited his hunting, a favorite hobby. Washington was an excellent dancer and frequently attended the theater, often making Shakespearean references in his letters. Washington drank in moderation and precisely recorded gambling wins and losses. He disliked the excessive drinking, gambling, smoking, and profanity that were common in colonial Virginia. Washington grew tobacco but he eventually stopped smoking and considered drunkenness a mans worst vice. He was glad that postRevolutionary Virginia society was less likely to force guests to drink and to make it an honor to send them home drunk. Washington suffered from problems with his teeth throughout his life, and historians have tracked his experiences in great detail. He lost his first adult tooth when he was twentytwo and had only one left by the time that he became president. John Adams claimed that he lost them because he used them to crack Brazil nuts, but modern historians suggest that mercury oxide probably contributed to the loss, which he was given to treat illnesses such as smallpox and malaria. Washington had several sets of false teeth made, four of them by a dentist named John Greenwood. None of the sets were made from wood. The set made when he became president was carved from hippopotamus and elephant ivory, held together with gold springs. Prior to these, he had a set made with real human teeth,Dentures, 1790 1799, George Washingtons Mount Vernon Estate, Museum and Gardens likely ones that he purchased from several unnamed Negroes, presumably Mount Vernon slaves in 1784.Mary V. Thompson, The Private Life of George Washingtons Slaves, Frontline, PBS Dental problems left Washington in constant pain, for which he took laudanum. This distress may be apparent in many of the portraits painted while he was still in office, including the one still used on the 1 bill. Religion For his entire life, Washington was affiliated with the established Anglican Church of Great Britain. Following the Revolution, in the United States it was disestablished and reorganized as the Episcopal Church. Washington served as a vestryman and as church warden for both Fairfax Parish in Alexandria and Truro Parish. These were administrative positions. As with all official positions in Virginia while it had an established church, an officeholder was required to swear that he would not speak or act in a way that did not conform to the tenets of the Church. Numerous historians have suggested that, theologically, Washington agreed largely with the Deists, but he never expressed any particular Deist beliefs which he may have had. He often used words for the deity, such as God and Providence, while avoiding using the words Jesus and Christ. In his collected works, such terms appear in an official letter to Indians, which might have been drafted by an aide. At the time, Deism was a theological outlook, not an organized denomination. It was compatible with being an Episcopalian. Historian Gregg Frazer argues that Washington was not a deist but a theistic rationalist. This theological position rejected core beliefs of Christianity, such as the divinity of Christ, the Trinity, and original sin. Unlike the deists, the theological rationalists believed in the efficacy of prayer to God.Gregg L. Frazer, The Religious Beliefs of Americas Founders Reason, Revelation, and Revolution Theologian Peter A. Lillback argues that Washington was neither a deist nor a theistic rationalist but a Christian who accepted the core beliefs of Christianity.Peter A. Lillback, George Washingtons Sacred Fire Foreword. Washington frequently accompanied his wife to church services. Thirdhand reports say that he took communion, although he is usually characterized as never or rarely participating in the rite. He would regularly leave services before communion with the other noncommunicants . He ceased attending at all on communion Sundays after being admonished by a rector. Washington regarded religion as a protective influence for Americas social and political order, and recognized the churchs laudable endeavors to render men sober, honest, and good citizens, and the obedient subjects of a lawful government. It is generally concluded that Washington was a Christian, although the exact nature of his religious beliefs has been debated by some historians and biographers for over two hundred years. Washington biographer Don Higginbotham notes that, in such instances, people with diametrically opposing opinions frequently base their views of Washingtons beliefs on their own beliefs. Higginbotham claims that Washington harbored no contempt of organized Christianity and its clergy, and quotes him as saying being no bigot myself to any mode of worship. Washington, as commander of the army and as president, was a vigorous promoter of tolerance for all religious denominations. He believed that religion was an important support for public order, morality, and virtue. He often attended services of different denominations, and he suppressed antiCatholic celebrations in the Army. Michael Novak and Jana Novak suggest that it may have been Washingtons intention to maintain a studied ambiguity regarding his own deepest religious convictions, so that all Americans, both in his own time and for all time to come, might feel free to approach him on their own terms and might also feel like full members of the new republic, equal with every other.Novak, M. and Novak, J., Washingtons God Religion, Liberty, and the Father of Our Country , Basic Books, 2007, p. 158. They conclude He was educated in the Episcopal Church, to which he always adhered and my conviction is, that he believed in the fundamental doctrines of Christianity as usually taught in that Church, according to his understanding of them but without a particle of intolerance, or disrespect for the faith and modes of worship adopted by Christians of other denominations.Novak, M. and Novak, J., Washingtons God Religion, Liberty, and the Father of Our Country , Basic Books, 2007, p. 161. Freemasonry Masonic Memorial As a young man, Washington was initiated into Freemasonry in 1752 at the age of 20. He had a high regard for the Masonic Order and often praised it, but he seldom attended lodge meetings. He was attracted by the movements dedication to the Enlightenment principles of rationality, reason, and fraternalism. The American lodges did not share the anticlerical perspective that made the European lodges so controversial. In 1777, a convention of Virginia lodges recommended Washington to be the Grand Master of the newly established Grand Lodge of Virginia. He declined, due to his responsibility in leading the Continental Army at a critical stage. He also did not consider it Masonically legal to serve as Grand Master because he had never been installed as Master or Warden of a lodge. In 1788, Washington was named Master in the Virginia charter of Alexandria Lodge No. 22, with his personal consent. Slavery Washington was the only prominent Founding Father to arrange in his will for the freeing of all his slaves following his death and the death of his wife. He privately opposed slavery as an institution, which he viewed as economically unsound and morally indefensible. He believed that the divisiveness of his countrymens feelings about slavery was a potentially mortal threat to the unity of the nation.Striner, 2006, p. 15 He never publicly challenged the institution of slavery, possibly because he wanted to avoid provoking a split in the new republic over so inflammatory an issue., The Papers of G. Washington He did sign into law the Slave Trade Act of 1794, which limited American involvement in the Atlantic slave trade. Washington had owned slaves since the death of his father in 1743, when he inherited 10 slaves. He owned at least 36 slaves by the time of his marriage to Martha Custis in 1759, which meant that he had achieved the status of a major planter. Martha brought at least 85 dower slaves to Mount Vernon after their marriage, as she had inherited one third of her late husbands estate. Washington bought more land using his wifes great wealth, tripling the size of the plantation at Mount Vernon and purchasing the additional slaves needed to work it. By 1774, he paid taxes on 135 slaves . The last record of a slave purchase by him was in 1772, although he later received some slaves in repayment of debts. Washington also used some hired staff and white indentured servants in April 1775, he offered a reward for the return of two runaway white servants. Washington refused to allow his slaves to be sold without their permission. This policy was economically inefficient, resulting in an unnecessarily large work force. In his will, he provided that his slaves should be freed after the death of his wife. However, Martha chose to free them at the end of 1800, fearing that her life was not safe in their hands because her death would make them free. Most of the former slaves were unable to find suitable work after being freed and lived in poverty. Part of this was due to Virginia passing laws against educating blacks and restricting the rights of free blacks. Washington sought to preserve slaves families, although he allowed the administration of corporal punishment by overseers, as was customary for the time. He approved when his estate manager Anthony Whitting whipped a slave named Charlotte when Martha deemed her to be indolent. Your treatment of Charlotte was very proper, Washington wrote in 1793, and if she or any other of the servants will not do their duty by fair means, or are impertinent, correction must be administered. Another of his estate managers named Hiland Crow was notorious for brutally flogging slaves. Some of his slaves absconded during the Revolutionary War to find protection with the enemy, and Washington did not let up in his efforts to reclaim what he saw as his property. One internal British memo portrayed him after victory as demanding, with all the grossness and ferocity of a captain of banditti, that the runaways be returned. Legacy The ConstableHamilton Portrait by Gilbert Stuart George Washingtons legacy remains among the two or three greatest in American history, as CommanderinChief of the Continental Army, hero of the Revolution, and the first President of the United States. Congressman Henry LightHorse Harry Lee, a Revolutionary War comrade, famously eulogized Washington, First in war first in peace and first in the hearts of his countrymen. Lees words set the standard by which Washingtons overwhelming reputation was impressed upon the American memory. Biographers hailed him as the great exemplar of republicanism. Washington set many precedents for the national government, and the presidency in particular, and was called the Father of His Country as early as 1778. Washingtons Birthday is a federal holiday in the United States. In terms of personality, biographer Douglas Southall Freeman concluded, the great big thing stamped across that man is character. By character, says David Hackett Fischer, Freeman meant integrity, selfdiscipline, courage, absolute honesty, resolve, and decision, but also forbearance, decency, and respect for others. Washington became an international icon for liberation and nationalism, as the leader of the first successful revolution against a colonial empire. The Federalists made him the symbol of their party but, for many years, the Jeffersonians continued to distrust his influence and delayed building the Washington Monument. On January 31, 1781, he was elected a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. During the United States Bicentennial year, George Washington was posthumously appointed to the grade of General of the Armies of the United States by the congressional joint resolution Public Law 94479 passed on January 19, 1976, with an effective appointment date of July 4, 1976. This restored his position as the highestranking military officer in U.S. history. Papers The serious collection and publication of Washingtons documentary record began with the pioneer work of Jared Sparks in the 1830s in Life and Writings of George Washington . The Writings of George Washington from the Original Manuscript Sources, 1745 1799 is a 37 volume set edited by John C. Fitzpatrick. It contains over 17,000 letters and documents and is available online from the University of Virginia. The definitive letterpress edition of his writings was begun by the University of Virginia in 1968, and today comprises 52 published volumes, with more to come. It contains everything written by Washington or signed by him, together with most of his incoming letters. Part of the collection is available online from the University of Virginia. Monuments and memorials Washington Monument, Washington, DC Many places and entities have been named in honor of Washington. His name became that of the nations capital Washington, D.C. The state of Washington is the only state to be named after a United States president. Mount Washington in New Hampshire, the tallest mountain in the Northeast, was named soon after the American Revolution by Colonel John Whipple. Washington, Theodore Roosevelt, Thomas Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln are depicted in stone at the Mount Rushmore Memorial. The Washington Monument was built in his honor, one of the bestknown American landmarks. The George Washington Masonic National Memorial in Alexandria, Virginia was constructed between 1922 and 1932 with voluntary contributions from all 52 local governing bodies of the Freemasons in the United States. There have been many proposals to build a monument to Washington, starting after victory in the Revolution. After his death, Congress authorized a suitable memorial in the national capital, but the decision was reversed when the DemocraticRepublicans took control of Congress in 1801. The DemocraticRepublicans were dismayed that Washington had become the symbol of the Federalist Party. Construction of the 554 foot memorial didnt begin until 1848. It was completed in 1885. There are many other Washington Monuments in the United States, including two wellknown equestrian statues, one in Manhattan and one in Richmond, Virginia. The first statue to show Washington on horseback was dedicated in 1856 and is located in Manhattans Union Square. The worlds busiest bridge, the George Washington Bridge, is named in his honor. Several naval vessels are named in Washingtons honor, including the USS George Washington . Baillys George Washington, Independence Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania The first Washington Monument in Baltimore, Maryland JeanAntoine Houdons statue, State Capitol in Virginia Lieutenant General George Washington, Washington Circle, Washington, D.C. George Washingtons likeness under construction on Mount Rushmore Postage and currency George Washington appears on contemporary U.S. currency, including the onedollar bill and the quarterdollar coin . Washington and Benjamin Franklin appeared on the nations first postage stamps in 1847. Since that time, Washington has appeared on many postage issues, more than all other presidents combined. Washingtons victory over Cornwallis at the Battle of Yorktown was commemorated with a twocent stamp on the battles 150th anniversary on October 19, 1931.Trotter, Gordon T., Yorktown Issue, National Postal Museum online. The 150th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution with George Washington as presiding officer was celebrated with a threecent issue on September 17, 1937, adapted from the painting by Julius Brutus Stearns.Trotter, Gordon T., Constitution Sesquicentennial plate block of four Constitution Sesquicentennial Issue, National Postal Museum online. Washingtons presidential inauguration at Federal Hall in New York City was celebrated on its 150th anniversary on April 30, 1939.Haimann, Alexander T., Washington Inauguration Issue, National Postal Museum online. Selected Issues Washington,issue of 1862 WashingtonFranklinIssue of 1917 Washington at Valley Forge, issue of 1928 Washington as President of the Constitutional Convention, issue of 1937 Selected currency George Washingtonquarter dollar George Washington on the1928 dollar bill Cherry tree Perhaps the bestknown story about Washingtons childhood is that he chopped down his fathers favorite cherry tree and admitted the deed when questioned I cant tell a lie, Pa. The anecdote was first reported by biographer Parson Weems, who interviewed people after Washingtons death who knew him as a child over a halfcentury earlier. The Weems text was very widely reprinted throughout the 19th century, for example in McGuffey Readers. Adults wanted children to learn moral lessons from history, especially as taught by example from the lives of great national heroes like Washington. After 1890 historians insisted on scientific research methods to validate every statement, and there was no documentation for this anecdote apart from Weems report that he learned it from one of the neighbors who knew the young Washington. Joseph Rodman claimed in 1904 that Weems plagiarized other Washington tales from published fiction set in England, but no one has found an alternative source for the cherry tree story. Austin Washington, a descendant of George Washington, maintains that it is unlikely that Parson Weems, a man of the clergy, would write an account about truth and honesty and then lie about such a story. He further maintains that, if Weems was making up a story, he would have more dramatically depicted the young Washington chopping down the cherry tree, not merely barking it , as Weems never claimed that the tree was chopped down. There has been much conjecture and ad hominem attacks from some historians about Weems and his story, but none have proven or disproven the story., pp. 20 24 Personal property auction record George Washingtons personal annotated copy of the Acts Passed at a Congress of the United States of America from 1789 includes the Constitution of the United States and a draft of the Bill of Rights. It was sold on June 22, 2012, at Christies for 9,826,500 to The Mount Vernon Ladies Association. This was the record for a document sold at auction. See also Culper Ring, the spy ring organized by Benjamin Tallmadge and supervised by Washington American gentry Conotocaurious , a nickname given to Washington by Iroquois Native Americans Electoral history of George Washington List of federal judges appointed by George Washington List of notable Freemasons List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience List of United States militia units in the American Revolutionary War Wheres George, a website that tracks the circulation of American paper money Notes References Bibliography Book sources , Pulitzer Prize , standard political history of 1790s , heavily illustrated Online sources Primary sources Writings of George Washington edited by John C. Fitzpatrick, et al. Founders Online, searchable edition External links White House biography George Washingtons Mount Vernon American President George Washington at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia George Washington A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress George Washington Resources at the University of Virginia Library Original Digitized Letters of George Washington Shapell Manuscript Foundation The Papers of George Washington at the Avalon Project The Papers of George Washington, subset of Founders Online from the National Archives George Washington Birthplace National Monument, Virginia from the National Park Service Copies of the wills of General George Washington the first president of the United States and of Martha Washington, his wife , edited by E. R. Holbrook George Washington Personal Manuscripts Category1732 births Category1799 deaths Category18thcentury American Episcopalians Category18thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican cartographers CategoryAmerican deists CategoryAmerican foreign policy writers CategoryAmerican Freemasons CategoryAmerican male writers CategoryAmerican military personnel CategoryAmerican people of Dutch descent CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of Huguenot descent CategoryAmerican planters CategoryAmerican surveyors CategoryBritish America army officers CategoryBurials at Mount Vernon CategoryChancellors of the College of William Mary CategoryCommanders in chief CategoryCongressional Gold Medal recipients CategoryContinental Army generals CategoryContinental Army officers from Virginia CategoryContinental Congressmen from Virginia CategoryFellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences CategoryFree speech activists CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHouse of Burgesses members CategoryMembers of the American Philosophical Society CategoryPeople from Fairfax County, Virginia CategoryPeople from Westmoreland County, Virginia CategoryPeople of the American Enlightenment CategoryPeople of Virginia in the American Revolution CategoryPeople of Virginia in the French and Indian War CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryAmerican rebels CategorySigners of the United States Constitution CategorySmallpox survivors CategoryUnited States Army generals CategoryUnited States Army personnel CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1789 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1792 CategoryVirginia militiamen in the American Revolution CategoryWashington and Lee University people CategoryWashington College people CategoryWashington family CategoryAmerican slave owners CategoryVirginiaIndependents
Stephen Grover Cleveland was an American politician and lawyer who was the 22nd and 24th President of the United States, the only President in American history to serve two nonconsecutive terms in office .He was therefore the only person to be counted twice in the numbering of the presidents. He won the popular vote for three presidential electionsin 1884, 1888, and 1892and was one of two Democrats to be elected president during the era of Republican political domination dating from 1861 to 1933. Cleveland was the leader of the probusiness Bourbon Democrats who opposed high tariffs, Free Silver, inflation, imperialism, and subsidies to business, farmers, or veterans on libertarian philosophical grounds. His crusade for political reform and fiscal conservatism made him an icon for American conservatives of the era.Blum, 527 Cleveland won praise for his honesty, selfreliance, integrity, and commitment to the principles of classical liberalism.Jeffers, 8 12 Nevins, 4 5 Beito and Beito He fought political corruption, patronage, and bossism. As a reformer Cleveland had such prestige that the likeminded wing of the Republican Party, called Mugwumps, largely bolted the GOP presidential ticket and swung to his support in the 1884 election.McFarland, 11 56 As his second administration began, disaster hit the nation when the Panic of 1893 produced a severe national depression, which Cleveland was unable to reverse. It ruined his Democratic Party, opening the way for a Republican landslide in 1894 and for the agrarian and silverite seizure of the Democratic Party in 1896. The result was a political realignment that ended the Third Party System and launched the Fourth Party System and the Progressive Era.Gould, passim Cleveland was a formidable policymaker, and he also drew corresponding criticism. His intervention in the Pullman Strike of 1894 to keep the railroads moving angered labor unions nationwide in addition to the party in Illinois his support of the gold standard and opposition to Free Silver alienated the agrarian wing of the Democratic Party.Tugwell, 220 249 Critics complained that Cleveland had little imagination and seemed overwhelmed by the nations economic disasters depressions and strikes in his second term. Even so, his reputation for probity and good character survived the troubles of his second term. Biographer Allan Nevins wrote, In Grover Cleveland, the greatness lies in typical rather than unusual qualities. He had no endowments that thousands of men do not have. He possessed honesty, courage, firmness, independence, and common sense. But he possessed them to a degree other men do not.Nevins, 4 Today, Cleveland is considered by most historians to have been a successful leader, generally ranked among the second tier of American presidents. Early life Childhood and family history Caldwell Presbyterian parsonage, birthplace of Grover Cleveland Stephen Grover Cleveland was born on March 18, 1837, in Caldwell, New Jersey, to Ann and Richard Falley Cleveland.Nevins, 8 10 Clevelands father was a Congregational and Presbyterian minister who was originally from Connecticut.Graff, 3 4 Nevins, 8 10 His mother was from Baltimore and was the daughter of a bookseller.Graff, 3 4 On his fathers side, Cleveland was descended from English ancestors, the first of the family having emigrated to Massachusetts from Cleveland, England in 1635.Nevins, 6 His fathers maternal grandfather, Richard Falley Jr., fought at the Battle of Bunker Hill, and was the son of an immigrant from Guernsey. On his mothers side, Cleveland was descended from AngloIrish Protestants and German Quakers from Philadelphia.Nevins, 9 Cleveland was distantly related to General Moses Cleaveland, after whom the city of Cleveland, Ohio, was named.Graff, 7 Cleveland, the fifth of nine children, was named Stephen Grover in honor of the first pastor of the First Presbyterian Church of Caldwell, where his father was pastor at the time. He became known as Grover in his adult life.Nevins, 10 Graff, 3 In 1841, the Cleveland family moved to Fayetteville, New York, where Grover spent much of his childhood.Nevins, 11 Graff, 8 9 Neighbors later described him as full of fun and inclined to play pranks,Nevins, 11 and fond of outdoor sports.Jeffers, 17 In 1850, Clevelands father moved to Clinton, Oneida County, New York, to work as district secretary for the American Home Missionary Society.Nevins, 17 19 Despite his fathers dedication to his missionary work, the income was insufficient for the large family. Financial conditions forced him to remove Grover from school into a twoyear mercantile apprenticeship in Fayetteville. The experience was valuable and brief, and the living conditions quite austere. Grover returned to Clinton and his schooling at the completion of the apprentice contract.Tugwell, 14 In 1853, when missionary work began to take a toll on his health, Clevelands father took an assignment in Holland Patent, New York and the family moved again.Nevins, 21 Shortly after, he died from a gastric ulcer, with Grover reputedly hearing of his fathers death from a boy selling newspapers. Education and moving west An early, undated photograph of Grover Cleveland Cleveland received his elementary education at the Fayetteville Academy and the Clinton Liberal Academy.Nevins, 18 19 Jeffers, 19 After his father died in 1853, he again left school so as to help support his family. Later that year, Clevelands brother William was hired as a teacher at the New York Institute for the Blind in New York City, and William obtained a place for Cleveland as an assistant teacher. He returned home to Holland Patent at the end of 1854, where an elder in his church offered to pay for his college education if he would promise to become a minister. Cleveland declined, and in 1855 he decided to move west.Nevins, 23 27 He stopped first in Buffalo, New York, where his uncle, Lewis F. Allen, gave him a clerical job.Nevins, 27 33 Allen was an important man in Buffalo, and he introduced his nephew to influential men there, including the partners in the law firm of Rogers, Bowen, and Rogers.Nevins, 31 36 Millard Fillmore, the 13th President of the United States, had previously worked for the partnership.Graff, 11 Cleveland later took a clerkship with the firm, began to read the law, and was admitted to the New York bar in 1859.Graff, 14 Early career and the Civil War Cleveland worked for the Rogers firm for three years, then left in 1862 to start his own practice.Graff, 14 15 In January 1863, he was appointed assistant district attorney of Erie County.Graff, 15 Nevins, 46 With the American Civil War raging, Congress passed the Conscription Act of 1863, requiring ablebodied men to serve in the army if called upon, or else to hire a substitute. Cleveland chose the latter course, paying 150 to George Benninsky, a thirtytwoyearold Polish immigrant, to serve in his place.Graff, 14 Nevins, 51 52. Benninsky survived the war. As a lawyer, Cleveland became known for his singleminded concentration and dedication to hard work.Nevins, 52 53 In 1866, he successfully defended some participants in the Fenian raid, working on a pro bono basis .Nevins, 54 In 1868, Cleveland attracted professional attention for his winning defense of a libel suit against the editor of Buffalos Commercial Advertiser .Nevins, 54 55 During this time, Cleveland assumed a lifestyle of simplicity, taking residence in a plain boarding house Cleveland dedicated his growing income instead to the support of his mother and younger sisters.Nevins, 55 56 While his personal quarters were austere, Cleveland enjoyed an active social life and the easygoing sociability of hotellobbies and saloons.Nevins, 56 He shunned the circles of higher society of Buffalo in which his uncles family traveled.Tugwell, 26 Political career in New York Sheriff of Erie County Statue of Grover Cleveland outside City Hall in Buffalo, New York From his earliest involvement in politics, Cleveland aligned with the Democratic Party.Nevins, 44 45 He had a decided aversion to Republicans John Fremont and Abraham Lincoln, and the heads of the Rogers law firm were solid Democrats.Tugwell, 32 In 1865, he ran for District Attorney, losing narrowly to his friend and roommate, Lyman K. Bass, the Republican nominee. In 1870, with the help of friend Oscar Folsom, Cleveland secured the Democratic nomination for Sheriff of Erie County, New York.Nevins, 58 He won the election by a 303vote margin and took office on January 1, 1871 at age 33.Jeffers, 33 While this new career took him away from the practice of law, it was rewarding in other ways the fees were said to yield up to 40,000 over the twoyear term. Clevelands service as sheriff was unremarkable biographer Rexford Tugwell described the time in office as a waste for Cleveland politically. Cleveland was aware of graft in the sheriffs office during his tenure and chose not to confront it.Tugwell, 36 A notable incident of his term took place on September 6, 1872, when Patrick Morrissey was executed, who had been convicted of murdering his mother.Jeffers, 34 Nevins, 61 62 As sheriff, Cleveland was responsible for either personally carrying out the execution or paying a deputy 10 to perform the task. In spite of reservations about the hanging, Cleveland executed Morrissey himself he hanged another murderer, John Gaffney, on February 14, 1873. After his term as sheriff ended, Cleveland returned to his law practice, opening a firm with his friends Lyman K. Bass and Wilson S. Bissell.Jeffers, 36 Nevins, 64 Elected to Congress in 1872, Bass did not spend much time at the firm, but Cleveland and Bissell soon rose to the top of Buffalos legal community.Nevins, 66 71 Up to that point, Clevelands political career had been honorable and unexceptional. As biographer Allan Nevins wrote, Probably no man in the country, on March 4, 1881, had less thought than this limited, simple, sturdy attorney of Buffalo that four years later he would be standing in Washington and taking the oath as President of the United States.Nevins, 78 It was during this period that Cleveland began a relationship with a widow, Maria Crofts Halpin, and later assumed responsibility for supporting her and a child born at the time. The matter became a campaign issue for the GOP in his first presidential campaign. Mayor of Buffalo In the 1870s, the municipal government in Buffalo had grown increasingly corrupt, with Democratic and Republican political machines cooperating to share the spoils of political office.Nevins, 79 Graff, 18 19 Jeffers, 42 45 Welch, 24 In 1881 the Republicans nominated a slate of particularly disreputable machine politicians the Democrats saw the opportunity to gain the votes of disaffected Republicans by nominating a more honest candidate.Nevins, 79 80 Graff, 18 19 Welch, 24 The party leaders approached Cleveland, and he agreed to run for Mayor of Buffalo, provided that the rest of the ticket was to his liking.Nevins, 80 81 When the more notorious politicians were left off the Democratic ticket, Cleveland accepted the nomination. Cleveland was elected mayor with 15,120 votes, as against 11,528 for Milton C. Beebe, his opponent.Nevins, 83 He took office January 2, 1882. Clevelands term as mayor was spent fighting the entrenched interests of the party machines.Graff, 19 Jeffers, 46 50 Among the acts that established his reputation was a veto of the streetcleaning bill passed by the Common Council.Nevins, 84 86 The streetcleaning contract was open for bids, and the Council selected the highest bidder at 422,000, rather than the lowest of 100,000 less, because of the political connections of the bidder. While this sort of bipartisan graft had previously been tolerated in Buffalo, Mayor Cleveland would have none of it. His veto message said, I regard it as the culmination of a most barefaced, impudent, and shameless scheme to betray the interests of the people, and to worse than squander the public money.Nevins, 85 The Council reversed itself and awarded the contract to the lowest bidder.Nevins, 86 Cleveland also asked the state legislature to form a Commission to develop a plan to improve the sewer system in Buffalo at a much lower cost than previously proposed locally this plan was successfully adopted.Tugwell, 58 For this, and other actions safeguarding public funds, Clevelands reputation as a leader willing to purge government corruption began to spread beyond Erie County.Nevins, 94 95 Jeffers, 50 51 Governor of New York Gubernatorial portrait of Grover Cleveland New York Democratic party officials began to consider Cleveland a possible nominee for governor.Nevins, 94 99 Graff, 26 27 Daniel Manning, a party insider who admired Clevelands record, was instrumental in his candidacy.Tugwell, 68 70 With a split in the state Republican party in 1882, the Democratic party was considered to be at an advantage there were several contenders for that partys nomination. The two leading Democratic candidates were Roswell P. Flower and Henry W. Slocum. Their factions deadlocked, and the convention could not agree on a nominee.Graff, 26 Nevins, 101 103 Cleveland, in third place on the first ballot, picked up support in subsequent votes and emerged as the compromise choice.Nevins, 103 104 The Republican party remained divided against itself, and in the general election Cleveland emerged the victor, with 535,318 votes to Republican nominee Charles J. Folgers 342,464.Nevins, 105 Clevelands margin of victory was, at the time, the largest in a contested New York election the Democrats also picked up seats in both houses of the New York State Legislature.Graff, 28 Cleveland brought his opposition to needless spending to the governors office he promptly sent the legislature eight vetos in his first two months in office.Graff, 35 The first to attract attention was his veto of a bill to reduce the fares on New York City elevated trains to five cents.Graff, 35 36 The bill had broad support because the trains owner, Jay Gould, was unpopular, and his fare increases were widely denounced.Nevins, 114 116 Cleveland, however, saw the bill as unjust Gould had taken over the railroads when they were failing and had made the system solvent again.Nevins, 116 117 Moreover, Cleveland believed that altering Goulds franchise would violate the Contract Clause of the federal Constitution. Despite the initial popularity of the farereduction bill, the newspapers praised Clevelands veto. Theodore Roosevelt, then a member of the Assembly, had reluctantly voted for the bill to which Cleveland objected, in a desire to punish the unscrupulous railroad barons.Nevins, 117 118 After the veto, Roosevelt reversed himself, as did many legislators, and the veto was sustained. Clevelands defiance of political corruption won him popular acclaim, and the enmity of the influential Tammany Hall organization in New York City.Nevins, 125 126 Tammany, under its boss, John Kelly, had disapproved of Clevelands nomination as governor, and their resistance intensified after Cleveland openly opposed and prevented the reelection of their point man in the State Senate, Thomas F. Grady.Tugwell, 77 Cleveland also steadfastly opposed nominees of the Tammanyites, as well as bills passed as a result of their deal making.Tugwell, 73 The loss of Tammanys support was offset by the support of Theodore Roosevelt and other reformminded Republicans who helped Cleveland to pass several laws reforming municipal governments.Nevins, 138 140 Election of 1884 Nomination for president The Republicans convened in Chicago and nominated former Speaker of the House James G. Blaine of Maine for president on the fourth ballot. Blaines nomination alienated many Republicans who viewed Blaine as ambitious and immoral.Nevins, 185 186 Jeffers, 96 97 The GOP standard bearer was weakened by alienating the Mugwumps, and the Conkling faction, recently disenfranchised by President Arthur.Tugwell, 88 Democratic party leaders saw the Republicans choice as an opportunity to win the White House for the first time since 1856 if the right candidate could be found. An antiBlaine cartoon presents him as the tattooed man, with many indelible scandals. An antiCleveland cartoon highlights the Halpin scandal Among the Democrats, Samuel J. Tilden was the initial frontrunner, having been the partys nominee in the contested election of 1876.Nevins, 146 147 After Tilden declined a nomination due to his poor health, his supporters shifted to several other contenders. Cleveland was among the leaders in early support, and Thomas F. Bayard of Delaware, Allen G. Thurman of Ohio, Samuel Freeman Miller of Iowa, and Benjamin Butler of Massachusetts also had considerable followings, along with various favorite sons. Each of the other candidates had hindrances to his nomination Bayard had spoken in favor of secession in 1861, making him unacceptable to Northerners Butler, conversely, was reviled throughout the South for his actions during the Civil War Thurman was generally well liked, but was growing old and infirm, and his views on the silver question were uncertain.Nevins, 147 Cleveland, too, had detractors Tammany remained opposed to him but the nature of his enemies made him still more friends.Nevins, 152 153 Graff, 51 53 Cleveland led on the first ballot, with 392 votes out of 820.Nevins, 153 On the second ballot, Tammany threw its support behind Butler, but the rest of the delegates shifted to Cleveland, who won.Nevins, 154 Graff, 53 54 Thomas A. Hendricks of Indiana was selected as his running mate. Campaign against Blaine Corruption in politics was the central issue in 1884 indeed, Blaine had over the span of his career been involved in several questionable deals.Tugwell, 80 Clevelands reputation as an opponent of corruption proved the Democrats strongest asset.Summers, passim Grossman, 31 William C. Hudson created Clevelands contextual campaign slogan A public office is a public trust.Tugwell, 84 Reformminded Republicans called Mugwumps denounced Blaine as corrupt and flocked to Cleveland.Nevins, 156 159 Graff, 55 The Mugwumps, including such men as Carl Schurz and Henry Ward Beecher, were more concerned with morality than with party, and felt Cleveland was a kindred soul who would promote civil service reform and fight for efficiency in government. At the same time the Democrats gained support from the Mugwumps, they lost some bluecollar workers to the GreenbackLabor party, led by exDemocrat Benjamin Butler.Nevins, 187 188 In general, Cleveland abided by the precedent of minimizing presidential campaign travel and speechmaking Blaine became one of the first to break with that tradition.Tugwell, 93 The campaign focused on the candidates moral standards, as each side cast aspersions on their opponents. Clevelands supporters rehashed the old allegations that Blaine had corruptly influenced legislation in favor of the Little Rock and Fort Smith Railroad and the Union Pacific Railway, later profiting on the sale of bonds he owned in both companies.Nevins, 159 162 Graff, 59 60 Although the stories of Blaines favors to the railroads had made the rounds eight years earlier, this time Blaines correspondence was discovered, making his earlier denials less plausible. On some of the most damaging correspondence, Blaine had written Burn this letter, giving Democrats the last line to their rallying cry Blaine, Blaine, James G. Blaine, the continental liar from the state of Maine, Burn this letterGraff, 59 Jeffers, 111 Nevins, 177, Welch, 34 Regarding Cleveland, commentator Jeff Jacoby notes that, Not since George Washington had a candidate for President been so renowned for his rectitude.Jeff Jacoby, Grover the good the most honest president of them all, Boston Globe Feb. 15. 2 15 But the Republicans found a refutation buried in Clevelands past. Aided by the sermons of Reverend George H. Ball, a minister from Buffalo, they made public the allegation that Cleveland had fathered an illegitimate child while he was a lawyer there, with their rallies even subsequently including the chant Ma, Ma, wheres my PaTugwell, 90 When confronted with the scandal, Cleveland immediately instructed his supporters to Above all, tell the truth. Cleveland admitted to paying child support in 1874 to Maria Crofts Halpin, the woman who asserted he had fathered her son Oscar Folsom Cleveland and he assumed responsibility. Shortly before the 1884 election, the Republican media published an affidavit from Halpin in which she stated that until she met Cleveland, her life was pure and spotless, and there is not, and never was, a doubt as to the paternity of our child, and the attempt of Grover Cleveland, or his friends, to couple the name of Oscar Folsom, or any one else, with that boy, for that purpose is simply infamous and false. Results of the 1884 election The electoral votes of closely contested New York, New Jersey, Indiana, and Connecticut would determine the election.Welch, 33 In New York, the Tammany Democrats decided that they would gain more from supporting a Democrat they disliked than a Republican who would do nothing for them.Nevins, 170 171 Blaine hoped that he would have more support from Irish Americans than Republicans typically did while the Irish were mainly a Democratic constituency in the 19th century, Blaines mother was Irish Catholic, and he had been supportive of the Irish National Land League while he was Secretary of State.Nevins, 170 The Irish, a significant group in three of the swing states, did appear inclined to support Blaine until a Republican, Samuel D. Burchard, gave a speech pivotal for the Democrats, denouncing them as the party of Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion.Nevins, 181 184 The Democrats spread the word of this implied Catholic insult on the eve of the election. They also blistered Blaine for attending a banquet with some of New York Citys wealthiest men.Tugwell, 94 95 After the votes were counted, Cleveland narrowly won all four of the swing states, including New York by 1200 votes., While the popular vote total was close, with Cleveland winning by just onequarter of a percent, the electoral votes gave Cleveland a majority of 219 182. Following the electoral victory, the Ma, Ma... attack phrase gained a classic riposte Gone to the White House. Ha Ha HaGraff, 64 First term as president Reform Cleveland, portrayed as a tariff reformer Soon after taking office, Cleveland was faced with the task of filling all the government jobs for which the president had the power of appointment. These jobs were typically filled under the spoils system, but Cleveland announced that he would not fire any Republican who was doing his job well, and would not appoint anyone solely on the basis of party service.Nevins, 208 211 He also used his appointment powers to reduce the number of federal employees, as many departments had become bloated with political timeservers.Nevins, 214 217 Later in his term, as his fellow Democrats chafed at being excluded from the spoils, Cleveland began to replace more of the partisan Republican officeholders with Democrats.Graff, 83 this was especially the case with policy making positions.Tugwell, 100 While some of his decisions were influenced by party concerns, more of Clevelands appointments were decided by merit alone than was the case in his predecessors administrations.Nevins, 238 241 Welch, 59 60 Cleveland also reformed other parts of the government. In 1887, he signed an act creating the Interstate Commerce Commission.Nevins, 354 357 Graff, 85 He and Secretary of the Navy William C. Whitney undertook to modernize the navy and canceled construction contracts that had resulted in inferior ships.Nevins, 217 223 Graff, 77 Cleveland angered railroad investors by ordering an investigation of western lands they held by government grant.Nevins, 223 228 Secretary of the Interior Lucius Q.C. Lamar charged that the rights of way for this land must be returned to the public because the railroads failed to extend their lines according to agreements. The lands were forfeited, resulting in the return of approximately . Cleveland was the first Democratic President subject to the Tenure of Office Act which originated in 1867 the act purported to require the Senate to approve the dismissal of any presidential appointee who was originally subject to its advice and consent. Cleveland objected to the act in principle and his steadfast refusal to abide by it prompted its fall into disfavor and led to its ultimate repeal in 1887.Tugwell, 130 134 Vetoes Cleveland faced a Republican Senate and often resorted to using his veto powers.Graff, 85 He vetoed hundreds of private pension bills for American Civil War veterans, believing that if their pensions requests had already been rejected by the Pension Bureau, Congress should not attempt to override that decision.Nevins, 326 328 Graff, 83 84 When Congress, pressured by the Grand Army of the Republic, passed a bill granting pensions for disabilities not caused by military service, Cleveland also vetoed that.Nevins, 300 331 Graff, 83 Cleveland used the veto far more often than any president up to that time.See List of United States presidential vetoes In 1887, Cleveland issued his most wellknown veto, that of the Texas Seed Bill.Nevins, 331 332 Graff, 85 After a drought had ruined crops in several Texas counties, Congress appropriated 10,000 to purchase seed grain for farmers there. Cleveland vetoed the expenditure. In his veto message, he espoused a theory of limited government Silver One of the most volatile issues of the 1880s was whether the currency should be backed by gold and silver, or by gold alone.Jeffers, 157 158 The issue cut across party lines, with western Republicans and southern Democrats joining together in the call for the free coinage of silver, and both parties representatives in the northeast holding firm for the gold standard.Nevins, 201 205 Graff, 102 103 Because silver was worth less than its legal equivalent in gold, taxpayers paid their government bills in silver, while international creditors demanded payment in gold, resulting in a depletion of the nations gold supply. Cleveland and Treasury Secretary Daniel Manning stood firmly on the side of the gold standard, and tried to reduce the amount of silver that the government was required to coin under the BlandAllison Act of 1878.Nevins, 269 Cleveland unsuccessfully appealed to Congress to repeal this law before he was inaugurated.Tugwell, 110 Angered Westerners and Southerners advocated for cheap money to help their poorer constituents.Nevins, 268 In reply, one of the foremost silverites, Richard P. Bland, introduced a bill in 1886 that would require the government to coin unlimited amounts of silver, inflating the thendeflating currency.Nevins, 273 While Blands bill was defeated, so was a bill the administration favored that would repeal any silver coinage requirement. The result was a retention of the status quo, and a postponement of the resolution of the Free Silver issue.Nevins, 277 279 Tariffs When we consider that the theory of our institutions guarantees to every citizen the full enjoyment of all the fruits of his industry and enterprise, with only such deduction as may be his share toward the careful and economical maintenance of the Government which protects him, it is plain that the exaction of more than this is indefensible extortion and a culpable betrayal of American fairness and justice... The public Treasury, which should only exist as a conduit conveying the peoples tribute to its legitimate objects of expenditure, becomes a hoarding place for money needlessly withdrawn from trade and the peoples use, thus crippling our national energies, suspending our countrys development, preventing investment in productive enterprise, threatening financial disturbance, and inviting schemes of public plunder. Clevelands third annual message to Congress, December 6, 1887. Another contentious financial issue at the time was the protective tariff. While it had not been a central point in his campaign, Clevelands opinion on the tariff was that of most Democrats that the tariff ought to be reduced.Nevins, 280 282, Reitano, 46 62 Republicans generally favored a high tariff to protect American industries. American tariffs had been high since the Civil War, and by the 1880s the tariff brought in so much revenue that the government was running a surplus.Nevins, 286 287 In 1886, a bill to reduce the tariff was narrowly defeated in the House.Nevins, 287 288 The tariff issue was emphasized in the Congressional elections that year, and the forces of protectionism increased their numbers in the Congress, but Cleveland continued to advocate tariff reform.Nevins, 290 296 Graff, 87 88 As the surplus grew, Cleveland and the reformers called for a tariff for revenue only.Nevins, 370 371 His message to Congress in 1887 highlighted the injustice of taking more money from the people than the government needed to pay its operating expenses.Nevins, 379 381 Republicans, as well as protectionist northern Democrats like Samuel J. Randall, believed that American industries would fail without high tariffs, and they continued to fight reform efforts.Nevins, 383 385 Roger Q. Mills, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, proposed a bill to reduce the tariff from about 47 to about 40.Graff, 88 89 After significant exertions by Cleveland and his allies, the bill passed the House. The Republican Senate failed to come to agreement with the Democratic House, and the bill died in the conference committee. Dispute over the tariff persisted into the 1888 presidential election. Foreign policy, 1885 1889 Cleveland was a committed noninterventionist who had campaigned in opposition to expansion and imperialism. He refused to promote the previous administrations Nicaragua canal treaty, and generally was less of an expansionist in foreign relations.Nevins, 205, 404 405 Clevelands Secretary of State, Thomas F. Bayard, negotiated with Joseph Chamberlain of the United Kingdom over fishing rights in the waters off Canada, and struck a conciliatory note, despite the opposition of New Englands Republican Senators.Nevins, 404 413 Cleveland also withdrew from Senate consideration the Berlin Conference treaty which guaranteed an open door for U.S. interests in the Congo.Zakaria, 80 Military policy, 1885 1889 Clevelands military policy emphasized selfdefense and modernization. In 1885 Cleveland appointed the Board of Fortifications under Secretary of War William C. Endicott to recommend a new coastal fortification system for the United States.Berhow, pp. 9 10Endicott and Taft Boards at the Coast Defense Study Group website No improvements to US coastal defenses had been made since the late 1870s.Berhow, p. 8Civil War and 1870s defenses at the Coast Defense Study Group website The Boards 1886 report recommended a massive 127 million construction program at 29 harbors and river estuaries, to include new breechloading rifled guns, mortars, and naval minefields. The Board and the program are usually called the Endicott Board and the Endicott Program. Most of the Boards recommendations were implemented, and by 1910, 27 locations were defended by over 70 forts.Berhow, pp. 201 226List of all US coastal forts and batteries at the Coast Defense Study Group website Many of the weapons remained in place until scrapped in World War II as they were replaced with new defenses. Endicott also proposed to Congress a system of examinations for Army officer promotions.William Crowninshield Endicott, from Bell, William Gardner , Secretaries of War and Secretaries of the Army , Center of Military History, US Army For the Navy, the Cleveland administration spearheaded by Secretary of the Navy William Collins Whitney moved towards modernization, although no ships were constructed that could match the best European warships. Although completion of the four steelhulled warships begun under the previous administration was delayed due to a corruption investigation and subsequent bankruptcy of their building yard, these ships were completed in a timely manner in naval shipyards once the investigation was over.Bauer and Roberts, p. 141 Sixteen additional steelhulled warships were ordered by the end of 1888 these ships later proved vital in the Spanish American War of 1898, and many served in World War I. These ships included the secondclass battleships and , designed to match modern armored ships recently acquired by South American countries from Europe, such as the Brazilian battleship Riachuelo .Bauer and Roberts, p. 102 Eleven protected cruisers , one armored cruiser, and one monitor were also ordered, along with the experimental cruiser .Bauer and Roberts, pp. 101, 133, 141 147 Civil rights and immigration Cleveland, like a growing number of Northerners saw Reconstruction as a failed experiment, and was reluctant to use federal power to enforce the 15th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which guaranteed voting rights to African Americans.Welch, 65 66 Though Cleveland appointed no black Americans to patronage jobs, he allowed Frederick Douglass to continue in his post as recorder of deeds in Washington, D.C. and appointed another black man to replace Douglass upon his resignation. His decision to replace Douglass with a black man was met with outrage, but Cleveland claimed to have known Matthews personally.Henry L. Dawes wrote the Dawes Act, which Cleveland signed into law. Although Cleveland had condemned the outrages against Chinese immigrants, he believed that Chinese immigrants were unwilling to assimilate into white society.Welch, 72 Secretary of State Thomas F. Bayard negotiated an extension to the Chinese Exclusion Act, and Cleveland lobbied the Congress to pass the Scott Act, written by Congressman William Lawrence Scott, which prevented the return of Chinese immigrants who left the United States.Welch, 73 The Scott Act easily passed both houses of Congress, and Cleveland signed it into law on October 1, 1888. Indian policy Cleveland viewed Native Americans as wards of the state, saying in his first inaugural address that this guardianship involves, on our part, efforts for the improvement of their condition and enforcement of their rights.Welch, 70 Nevins, 358 359 He encouraged the idea of cultural assimilation, pushing for the passage of the Dawes Act, which provided for distribution of Indian lands to individual members of tribes, rather than having them continued to be held in trust for the tribes by the federal government. While a conference of Native leaders endorsed the act, in practice the majority of Native Americans disapproved of it.Graff, 206 207 Cleveland believed the Dawes Act would lift Native Americans out of poverty and encourage their assimilation into white society. It ultimately weakened the tribal governments and allowed individual Indians to sell land and keep the money. In the month before Clevelands 1885 inauguration, President Arthur opened four million acres of Winnebago and Crow Creek Indian lands in the Dakota Territory to white settlement by executive order.Brodsky, 141 142 Nevins, 228 229 Tens of thousands of settlers gathered at the border of these lands and prepared to take possession of them. Cleveland believed Arthurs order to be in violation of treaties with the tribes, and rescinded it on April 17 of that year, ordering the settlers out of the territory. Cleveland sent in eighteen companies of Army troops to enforce the treaties and ordered General Philip Sheridan, at the time Commanding General of the U. S. Army, to investigate the matter. Marriage and children Frances Folsom Cleveland Cleveland entered the White House as a bachelor, and his sister Rose Cleveland joined him, to act as hostess for the first two years of his administration.Brodsky, 158 Jeffers, 149 However, unlike the previous bachelor president James Buchanan, Cleveland did not remain a bachelor for very long. In 1885 the daughter of Clevelands friend Oscar Folsom visited him in Washington.Graff, 78 Frances Folsom was a student at Wells College. When she returned to school, President Cleveland received her mothers permission to correspond with her, and they were soon engaged to be married. On June 2, 1886, Cleveland married Frances Folsom in the Blue Room at the White House.Graff, 79 He was the second President to wed while in office,John Tyler, who married his second wife Julia Gardiner in 1844, was the first and has been the only President married in the White House. This marriage was unusual, since Cleveland was the executor of Oscar Folsoms estate and had supervised Francess upbringing after her fathers death nevertheless, the public took no exception to the match.Jeffers, 170 176 Graff, 78 81 Nevins, 302 308 Welch, 51 At 21 years, Frances Folsom Cleveland was the youngest First Lady in history, and the public soon warmed to her beauty and warm personality.Graff, 80 81 The Clevelands had five children Ruth , Esther , Marion , Richard , and Francis Grover . British philosopher Philippa Foot was their granddaughter.William Grimes, Philippa Foot, Renowned Philosopher, Dies at 90 NY Times October 9, 2010 Administration and Cabinet Clevelands first Cabinet. Front row, left to right Thomas F. Bayard, Cleveland , Daniel Manning, Lucius Q. C. Lamar Back row, left to right William F. Vilas, William C. Whitney, William C. Endicott, Augustus H. Garland Judicial appointments Chief Justice Melville Fuller During his first term, Cleveland successfully nominated two justices to the Supreme Court of the United States. The first, Lucius Q.C. Lamar, was a former Mississippi Senator who served in Clevelands Cabinet as Interior Secretary. When William Burnham Woods died, Cleveland nominated Lamar to his seat in late 1887. While Lamar had been well liked as a Senator, his service under the Confederacy two decades earlier caused many Republicans to vote against him. Lamars nomination was confirmed by the narrow margin of 32 to 28.Daniel J. Meador, Lamar to the Court Last Step to National Reunion Supreme Court Historical Society Yearbook 1986 27 47. Chief Justice Morrison Waite died a few months later, and Cleveland nominated Melville Fuller to fill his seat on April 30, 1888. Fuller accepted. He had previously declined Clevelands nomination to the Civil Service Commission, preferring his Chicago law practice. The Senate Judiciary Committee spent several months examining the littleknown nominee, before the Senate confirmed the nomination 41 to 20.Willard L. King, Melville Weston Fuller Chief Justice of the United States 1888 1910 Nevins, 445 450 Cleveland nominated 41 lower federal court judges in addition to his four Supreme Court justices. These included two judges to the United States circuit courts, nine judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 30 judges to the United States district courts. Because Cleveland served terms both before and after Congress eliminated the circuit courts in favor of the Courts of Appeals, he is one of only two presidents to have appointed judges to both bodies. The other, Benjamin Harrison, was in office at the time that the change was made. Thus, all of Clevelands appointments to the circuit courts were made in his first term, and all of his appointments to the Courts of Appeals were made in his second. Election of 1888 and return to private life Defeated by Harrison ClevelandThurman campaign poster Results of the 1888 Election The Republicans nominated Benjamin Harrison of Indiana for President and Levi P. Morton of New York for Vice President. Cleveland was easily renominated at the Democratic convention in St. Louis.Graff, 90 91 Following Vice President Thomas A. Hendricks death in 1885, the Democrats chose Allen G. Thurman of Ohio to be Clevelands new running mate. The Republicans gained the upper hand in the campaign, as Clevelands campaign was poorly managed by Calvin S. Brice and William H. Barnum, whereas Harrison had engaged more aggressive fundraisers and tacticians in Matt Quay and John Wanamaker.Tugwell, 166 The Republicans campaigned heavily on the tariff issue, turning out protectionist voters in the important industrial states of the North.Nevins, 418 420 Further, the Democrats in New York were divided over the gubernatorial candidacy of David B. Hill, weakening Clevelands support in that swing state.Nevins, 423 427 A letter from the British ambassador supporting Cleveland caused a scandal which cost Cleveland votes in New York. As in 1884, the election focused on the swing states of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Indiana. But unlike that year, when Cleveland had triumphed in all four, in 1888 he won only two, losing his home state of New York by 14,373 votes., The Republicans won Indiana, largely as the result of a fraudulent voting practice known as Blocks of Five.Nevins, 435 439 Jeffers, 220 222 Cleveland continued his duties diligently until the end of the term and began to look forward to return to private life.Nevins, 443 449 Private citizen for four years As Frances Cleveland left the White House, she told a staff member, Now, Jerry, I want you to take good care of all the furniture and ornaments in the house, for I want to find everything just as it is now, when we come back again. When asked when she would return, she responded, We are coming back four years from today.Nevins, 448 In the meantime, the Clevelands moved to New York City where Cleveland took a position with the law firm of Bangs, Stetson, Tracy, and MacVeigh. This affiliation was more of an office sharing arrangement, though quite compatible. Clevelands law practice brought only a moderate income, perhaps because Cleveland spent considerable time at the couples vacation home Gray Gables at Buzzard Bay, where fishing became his obsession.Tugwell, 175 While they lived in New York, the Clevelands first child, Ruth, was born in 1891.Nevins, 450 Graff, 99 100 The Harrison administration worked with Congress to pass the McKinley Tariff, an aggressively protectionist measure and the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which increased money backed by silverTugwell, 168 these were among policies Cleveland deplored as dangerous to the nations financial health.Graff, 102 105 Nevins, 465 467 At first he refrained from criticizing his successor, but by 1891 Cleveland felt compelled to speak out, addressing his concerns in an open letter to a meeting of reformers in New York.Graff, 104 105 Nevins, 467 468 The silver letter thrust Clevelands name back into the spotlight just as the 1892 election was approaching.Nevins, 470 471 Election of 1892 Democratic nomination Clevelands enduring reputation as chief executive and his recent pronouncements on the monetary issues made him a leading contender for the Democratic nomination.Nevins, 468 469 His leading opponent was David B. Hill, a Senator for New York.Nevins, 470 473 Hill united the antiCleveland elements of the Democratic party silverites, protectionists, and Tammany Hall but was unable to create a coalition large enough to deny Cleveland the nomination. Despite some desperate maneuvering by Hill, Cleveland was nominated on the first ballot at the convention in Chicago.Tugwell, 182 For vice president, the Democrats chose to balance the ticket with Adlai E. Stevenson of Illinois, a silverite.Graff, 105 Nevins, 492 493 Although the Cleveland forces preferred Isaac P. Gray of Indiana for vice president, they accepted the convention favorite.William DeGregorio, The Complete Book of U.S. Presidents , Gramercy 1997 As a supporter of greenbacks and Free Silver to inflate the currency and alleviate economic distress in the rural districts, Stevenson balanced the otherwise hardmoney, goldstandard ticket headed by Cleveland. Campaign against Harrison Results of the 1892 election The Republicans renominated President Harrison, making the 1892 election a rematch of the one four years earlier. Unlike the turbulent and controversial elections of 1876, 1884, and 1888, the 1892 election was, according to Cleveland biographer Allan Nevins, the cleanest, quietest, and most creditable in the memory of the postwar generation,Nevins, 498 in part because Harrisons wife, Caroline, was dying of tuberculosis.Calhoun, 149 Harrison did not personally campaign at all. Following Caroline Harrisons death on October 25, two weeks before the national election, Cleveland and all of the other candidates stopped campaigning, thus making Election Day a somber and quiet event for the whole country as well as the candidates. The issue of the tariff worked to the Republicans advantage in 1888. The legislative revisions of the past four years also made imported goods so expensive that now many voters favored tariff reform and were skeptical of big business.Nevins, 499 Many Westerners, traditionally Republican voters, defected to James Weaver, the candidate of the new Populist Party. Weaver promised Free Silver, generous veterans pensions, and an eighthour work day.Graff, 106 107 Nevins, 505 506 The Tammany Hall Democrats adhered to the national ticket, allowing a united Democratic party to carry New York.Graff, 108 At the campaigns end, many Populists and labor supporters endorsed Cleveland after an attempt by the Carnegie Corporation to break the union during the Homestead strike in Pittsburgh and after a similar conflict between big business and labor at the Tennessee Coal and Iron Co.Tugwell, 184 185 The final result was a victory for Cleveland by wide margins in both the popular and electoral votes, and it was Clevelands third consecutive popular vote plurality., Second term as president Economic panic and the silver issue Clevelands humiliation by Gorman and the sugar trust Shortly after Clevelands second term began, the Panic of 1893 struck the stock market, and he soon faced an acute economic depression.Graff, 114 The panic was worsened by the acute shortage of gold that resulted from the increased coinage of silver, and Cleveland called Congress into special session to deal with the problem.Nevins, 526 528 The debate over the coinage was as heated as ever, and the effects of the panic had driven more moderates to support repealing the coinage provisions of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act. Even so, the silverites rallied their following at a convention in Chicago, and the House of Representatives debated for fifteen weeks before passing the repeal by a considerable margin.Nevins, 524 528, 537 540. The vote was 239 to 108. In the Senate, the repeal of silver coinage was equally contentious. Cleveland, forced against his better judgment to lobby the Congress for repeal, convinced enough Democrats and along with eastern Republicans, they formed a 48 37 majority for repeal.Tugwell, 192 195 Depletion of the Treasurys gold reserves continued, at a lesser rate, and subsequent bond issues replenished supplies of gold.Welch, 126 127 At the time the repeal seemed a minor setback to silverites, but it marked the beginning of the end of silver as a basis for American currency. Tariff reform Having succeeded in reversing the Harrison administrations silver policy, Cleveland sought next to reverse the effects of the McKinley tariff. The WilsonGorman Tariff Act was introduced by West Virginian Representative William L. Wilson in December 1893.Festus P. Summers, William L. Wilson and Tariff Reform A Biography After lengthy debate, the bill passed the House by a considerable margin.Nevins, 567 the vote was 204 to 140 The bill proposed moderate downward revisions in the tariff, especially on raw materials.Nevins, 564 566 Jeffers, 285 287 The shortfall in revenue was to be made up by an income tax of two percent on income above 4,000 . The bill was next considered in the Senate, where it faced stronger opposition from key Democrats led by Arthur Pue Gorman of Maryland, who insisted on more protection for their states industries than the Wilson bill allowed.Lambert, 213 15 The bill passed the Senate with more than 600 amendments attached that nullified most of the reforms.The income tax component of the WilsonGorman Act was partially ruled unconstitutional in 1895. See Pollock v. Farmers Loan Trust Co. The Sugar Trust in particular lobbied for changes that favored it at the expense of the consumer.Nevins, 577 578 Cleveland was outraged with the final bill, and denounced it as a disgraceful product of the control of the Senate by trusts and business interests.Nevins, 585 587 Jeffers, 288 289 Even so, he believed it was an improvement over the McKinley tariff and allowed it to become law without his signature.Nevins, 564 588 Jeffers, 285 289 Voting rights In 1892, Cleveland had campaigned against the Lodge Bill,James B. Hedges , North America, in William L. Langer, ed., An Encyclopedia of World History , Boston Houghton Mifflin, Part V, Section G, Subsection 1c, p. 794. which would have strengthened voting rights protections through the appointing of federal supervisors of congressional elections upon a petition from the citizens of any district. The Enforcement Act of 1871 had provided for a detailed federal overseeing of the electoral process, from registration to the certification of returns. Cleveland succeeded in ushering in the 1894 repeal of this law .Congressional Research Service , The Constitution of the United States Analysis and Interpretation Analysis of Cases Decided by the Supreme Court of the United States to June 28, 2002 , Washington Government Printing Office, Fifteenth Amendment, Congressional Enforcement, Federal Remedial Legislation, p. 2058. The pendulum thus swung from stronger attempts to protect voting rights to the repealing of voting rights protections this in turn led to unsuccessful attempts to have the federal courts protect voting rights in Giles v. Harris , 189 U.S. 475 , and Giles v. Teasley , 193 U.S. 146 . John T. Morgan, Senator from Alabama, opposed Cleveland on Free Silver, the tariff, and the Hawaii treaty, saying of Cleveland that I hate the ground that man walks on.Nevins, 568 Labor unrest The Panic of 1893 had damaged labor conditions across the United States, and the victory of antisilver legislation worsened the mood of western laborers.Graff, 117 118 Nevins, 603 605 A group of workingmen led by Jacob S. Coxey began to march east toward Washington, D.C. to protest Clevelands policies. This group, known as Coxeys Army, agitated in favor of a national roads program to give jobs to workingmen, and a weakened currency to help farmers pay their debts. By the time they reached Washington, only a few hundred remained, and when they were arrested the next day for walking on the lawn of the United States Capitol, the group scattered. Even though Coxeys Army may not have been a threat to the government, it signaled a growing dissatisfaction in the West with Eastern monetary policies.Graff, 118 Jeffers, 280 281 Pullman Strike The Pullman Strike had a significantly greater impact than Coxeys Army. A strike began against the Pullman Company over low wages and twelvehour workdays, and sympathy strikes, led by American Railway Union leader Eugene V. Debs, soon followed.Nevins, 611 613 By June 1894, 125,000 railroad workers were on strike, paralyzing the nations commerce.Nevins, 614 Because the railroads carried the mail, and because several of the affected lines were in federal receivership, Cleveland believed a federal solution was appropriate.Nevins, 614 618 Graff, 118 119 Jeffers, 296 297 Cleveland obtained an injunction in federal court, and when the strikers refused to obey it, he sent federal troops into Chicago and 20 other rail centers.Nevins, 619 623 Jeffers, 298 302. See also In re Debs . If it takes the entire army and navy of the United States to deliver a postcard in Chicago, he proclaimed, that card will be delivered.Nevins, 628 Most governors supported Cleveland except Democrat John P. Altgeld of Illinois, who became his bitter foe in 1896. Leading newspapers of both parties applauded Clevelands actions, but the use of troops hardened the attitude of organized labor toward his administration.Nevins, 624 628 Jeffers, 304 305 Graff, 120 Just before the 1894 election, Cleveland was warned by Francis Lynde Stetson, an advisor We are on the eve of a very dark night, unless a return of commercial prosperity relieves popular discontent with what they believe is Democratic incompetence to make laws, and consequently discontent with Democratic Administrations anywhere and everywhere.Francis Lynde Stetson to Cleveland, October 7, 1894 in Allan Nevins, ed. Letters of Grover Cleveland, 1850 1908 p. 369 The warning was appropriate, for in the Congressional elections, Republicans won their biggest landslide in decades, taking full control of the House, while the Populists lost most of their support. Clevelands factional enemies gained control of the Democratic Party in state after state, including full control in Illinois and Michigan, and made major gains in Ohio, Indiana, Iowa and other states. Wisconsin and Massachusetts were two of the few states that remained under the control of Clevelands allies. The Democratic opposition were close to controlling twothirds of the vote at the 1896 national convention, which they needed to nominate their own candidate. They failed for lack of unity and a national leader, as Illinois governor John Peter Altgeld had been born in Germany and was ineligible to be nominated for President.Richard J. Jensen, The Winning of the Midwest Social and Political Conflict, 1888 96 pp229 230 Foreign policy, 1893 1897 I suppose that right and justice should determine the path to be followed in treating this subject. If national honesty is to be disregarded and a desire for territorial expansion or dissatisfaction with a form of government not our own ought to regulate our conduct, I have entirely misapprehended the mission and character of our government and the behavior which the conscience of the people demands of their public servants. Clevelands message to Congress on the Hawaiian question, December 18, 1893 .Nevins, 560 When Cleveland took office he faced the question of Hawaiian annexation. In his first term, he had supported free trade with Hawaii and accepted an amendment that gave the United States a coaling and naval station in Pearl Harbor. In the intervening four years, Honolulu businessmen of European and American ancestry had denounced Queen Liliuokalani as a tyrant who rejected constitutional government. In early 1893 they overthrew her, set up a republican government under Sanford B. Dole, and sought to join the United States.Nevins, 549 552 Graff 121 122 The Harrison administration had quickly agreed with representatives of the new government on a treaty of annexation and submitted it to the Senate for approval. Five days after taking office on March 9, 1893, Cleveland withdrew the treaty from the Senate and sent former Congressman James Henderson Blount to Hawaii to investigate the conditions there.Nevins, 552 554 Graff, 122 Cleveland agreed with Blounts report, which found the populace to be opposed to annexation. Liliuokalani initially refused to grant amnesty as a condition of her reinstatement, saying that she would either execute or banish the current government in Honolulu, but Doles government refused to yield their position.Nevins, 558 559 By December 1893, the matter was still unresolved, and Cleveland referred the issue to Congress. In his message to Congress, Cleveland rejected the idea of annexation and encouraged the Congress to continue the American tradition of nonintervention . The Senate, under Democratic control but opposed to Cleveland, commissioned and produced the Morgan Report, which contradicted Blounts findings and found the overthrow was a completely internal affair.Welch, 174 Cleveland dropped all talk of reinstating the Queen, and went on to recognize and maintain diplomatic relations with the new Republic of Hawaii.McWilliams, 25 36 Closer to home, Cleveland adopted a broad interpretation of the Monroe Doctrine that not only prohibited new European colonies, but also declared an American national interest in any matter of substance within the hemisphere.Zakaria, 145 146 When Britain and Venezuela disagreed over the boundary between Venezuela and the colony of British Guiana, Cleveland and Secretary of State Richard Olney protested.Graff, 123 125 Nevins, 633 642 British Prime Minister Lord Salisbury and the British ambassador to Washington, Julian Pauncefote, misjudged how important successful resolution of the dispute was to the American government, having prolonged the crisis before ultimately accepting the American demand for arbitration.Paul Gibb, Unmasterly Inactivity Sir Julian Pauncefote, Lord Salisbury, and the Venezuela Boundary Dispute, Diplomacy Statecraft , Mar 2005, Vol. 16 Issue 1, pp. 23 55Nelson M. Blake, Background of Clevelands Venezuelan Policy, American Historical Review , Vol. 47, No. 2 , pp. 259 277 in JSTOR A tribunal convened in Paris in 1898 to decide the matter, and in 1899 awarded the bulk of the disputed territory to British Guiana.Graff, 123 125 But by standing with a Latin American nation against the encroachment of a colonial power, Cleveland improved relations with the United States southern neighbors, and at the same time, the cordial manner in which the negotiations were conducted also made for good relations with Britain.Nevins, 550, 633 648 Military policy, 1893 1897 The second Cleveland administration was as committed to military modernization as the first, and ordered the first ships of a navy capable of offensive action. Construction continued on the Endicott program of coastal fortifications begun under Clevelands first administration. The adoption of the Krag Jrgensen rifle, the US Armys first boltaction repeating rifle, was finalized.Bruce N. Canfield The Foreign Rifle U.S. Krag Jrgensen American Rifleman October 2010 pp. 86 89, 126, 129Hanevik, Karl Egil . Norske Militrgevrer etter 1867 In 1895 96 Secretary of the Navy Hilary A. Herbert, having recently adopted the aggressive naval strategy advocated by Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan, successfully proposed ordering five battleships and sixteen torpedo boats.Friedman, pp. 35 38Bauer and Roberts, pp. 162 165 Completion of these ships nearly doubled the Navys battleships and created a new torpedo boat force, which previously had only two boats. However, the battleships and seven of the torpedo boats were not completed until 1899 1901, after the Spanish American War.Bauer and Roberts, pp. 102 104, 162 165 Cancer Oil painting of Grover Cleveland, painted in 1899 by Anders Zorn In the midst of the fight for repeal of Free Silver coinage in 1893, Cleveland sought the advice of the White House doctor, Dr. OReilly, about soreness on the roof of his mouth and a craterlike edge ulcer with a granulated surface on the left side of Clevelands hard palate. Samples of the tumor were sent anonymously to the Army Medical Museum. The diagnosis was not a malignant cancer, but instead an epithelioma . Cleveland decided to have surgery secretly, to avoid further panic that might worsen the financial depression.Nevins, 528 529 Graff, 115 116 The surgery occurred on July 1, to give Cleveland time to make a full recovery in time for the upcoming Congressional session.Nevins, 531 533 Under the guise of a vacation cruise, Cleveland and his surgeon, Dr. Joseph Bryant, left for New York. The surgeons operated aboard the Oneida , a yacht owned by Clevelands friend E. C. Benedict, as it sailed off Long Island.Nevins, 529 The surgery was conducted through the Presidents mouth, to avoid any scars or other signs of surgery.Nevins, 530 531 The team, sedating Cleveland with nitrous oxide and ether, successfully removed parts of his upper left jaw and hard palate. The size of the tumor and the extent of the operation left Clevelands mouth disfigured.Nevins, 532 533 During another surgery, Cleveland was fitted with a hard rubber dental prosthesis that corrected his speech and restored his appearance. A cover story about the removal of two bad teeth kept the suspicious press placated.Nevins, 533 Graff, 116 Even when a newspaper story appeared giving details of the actual operation, the participating surgeons discounted the severity of what transpired during Clevelands vacation. In 1917, one of the surgeons present on the Oneida , Dr. William W. Keen, wrote an article detailing the operation. Cleveland enjoyed many years of life after the tumor was removed, and there was some debate as to whether it was actually malignant. Several doctors, including Dr. Keen, stated after Clevelands death that the tumor was a carcinoma. The lump was preserved and is on display at the Mtter Museum in Philadelphia Other suggestions included ameloblastoma or a benign salivary mixed tumor . In the 1980s, analysis of the specimen finally confirmed the tumor to be verrucous carcinoma, a lowgrade epithelial cancer with a low potential for metastasis. Administration and cabinet Clevelands last Cabinet. Front row, left to right Daniel S. Lamont, Richard Olney, Cleveland, John G. Carlisle, Judson Harmon Back row, left to right David R. Francis, William Lyne Wilson, Hilary A. Herbert, Julius S. Morton Judicial appointments Clevelands trouble with the Senate hindered the success of his nominations to the Supreme Court in his second term. In 1893, after the death of Samuel Blatchford, Cleveland nominated William B. Hornblower to the Court.Nevins, 569 570 Hornblower, the head of a New York City law firm, was thought to be a qualified appointee, but his campaign against a New York machine politician had made Senator David B. Hill his enemy. Further, Cleveland had not consulted the Senators before naming his appointee, leaving many who were already opposed to Cleveland on other grounds even more aggrieved. The Senate rejected Hornblowers nomination on January 15, 1894, by a vote of 30 to 24. Cleveland continued to defy the Senate by next appointing Wheeler Hazard Peckham another New York attorney who had opposed Hills machine in that state.Nevins, 570 571 Hill used all of his influence to block Peckhams confirmation, and on February 16, 1894, the Senate rejected the nomination by a vote of 32 to 41. Reformers urged Cleveland to continue the fight against Hill and to nominate Frederic R. Coudert, but Cleveland acquiesced in an inoffensive choice, that of Senator Edward Douglass White of Louisiana, whose nomination was accepted unanimously. Later, in 1896, another vacancy on the Court led Cleveland to consider Hornblower again, but he declined to be nominated.Nevins, 572 Instead, Cleveland nominated Rufus Wheeler Peckham, the brother of Wheeler Hazard Peckham, and the Senate confirmed the second Peckham easily. States admitted to the Union No new states were admitted to the Union during Clevelands first term. However, on February 22, 1889, days before leaving office, the 50th Congress passed the Enabling Act of 1889, authorizing North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, and Washington to form state governments and to gain admission to the Union. All four officially became states in November 1889, during the first year of Benjamin Harrisons administration. During his second term, the 53rd United States Congress passed an Enabling Act that permitted Utah to apply for statehood. Cleveland signed it on July 16, 1894. Utah joined the Union as the 45th state on January 4, 1896. 1896 election and retirement Cleveland in 1903 at age 66 by Frederick Gutekunst Clevelands agrarian and silverite enemies gained control of the Democratic party in 1896, repudiated his administration and the gold standard, and nominated William Jennings Bryan on a Silver Platform.Nevins, 684 693R. Hal Williams, Years of Decision American Politics in the 1890s Cleveland silently supported the Gold Democrats thirdparty ticket that promised to defend the gold standard, limit government and oppose high tariffs, but he declined their nomination for a third term.Graff, 128 129 The party won only 100,000 votes in the general election, and William McKinley, the Republican nominee, triumphed easily over Bryan. Agrarians nominated Bryan again in 1900. In 1904 the conservatives, with Clevelands support, regained control of the Democratic Party and nominated Alton B. Parker.Nevins, 754 758 Outgoing President Grover Cleveland, at right, stands nearby as William McKinley is sworn in as president by Chief Justice Melville Fuller. After leaving the White House on March 4, 1897, Cleveland lived in retirement at his estate, Westland Mansion, in Princeton, New Jersey.Graff, 131 133 Nevins, 730 735 For a time he was a trustee of Princeton University, and was one of the majority of trustees who preferred Dean Wests plans for the Graduate School and undergraduate living over those of Woodrow Wilson, then president of the university.Graff, p. 131 Alexander Leitch, A Princeton Companion , Princeton Univ Press, 1978, Grover Cleveland Cleveland consulted occasionally with President Theodore Roosevelt , but was financially unable to accept the chairmanship of the commission handling the Coal Strike of 1902.Nevins, 748 751 Cleveland still made his views known in political matters. In a 1905 article in The Ladies Home Journal , Cleveland weighed in on the womens suffrage movement, writing that sensible and responsible women do not want to vote. The relative positions to be assumed by men and women in the working out of our civilization were assigned long ago by a higher intelligence. Ladies Home Journal 22, , 7 8 In 1906, a group of New Jersey Democrats promoted Cleveland as a possible candidate for the United States Senate. The incumbent, John F. Dryden, was not seeking reelection, and some Democrats felt that the former President could attract the votes of some disaffected Republican legislators who might be drawn to Clevelands statesmanship and conservatism. Clevelands health had been declining for several years, and in the autumn of 1907 he fell seriously ill.Graff, 135 136 Nevins, 762 764 In 1908, he suffered a heart attack and died on June 24 at age 71. His last words were, I have tried so hard to do right.Jeffers, 340 Graff, 135. Nevins makes no mention of these last words. He is buried in the Princeton Cemetery of the Nassau Presbyterian Church. Honors and memorials In his first term in office, Cleveland sought a summer house to escape the heat and smells of Washington, D.C., near enough the capital. He secretly bought a farmhouse, Oak View , in a rural upland part of the District of Columbia, in 1886, and remodeled it into a Queen Anne style summer estate. He sold Oak View upon losing his bid for reelection in 1888. Not long thereafter, suburban residential development reached the area, which came to be known as Oak View, and then Cleveland Heights, and eventually Cleveland Park.Kimberly Prothro Williams, Cleveland Park Historic District brochure, D.C. Preservation League, 2001. The Clevelands are depicted in local murals.See, e.g. Grover Cleveland Hall at Buffalo State College in Buffalo, New York. Cleveland Hall houses the offices of the college president, vice presidents, and other administrative functions and student services. Cleveland was a member of the first board of directors of the then Buffalo Normal School. Grover Cleveland Middle School in his birthplace, Caldwell, New Jersey, was named for him, as is Grover Cleveland High School in Buffalo, New York, and the town of Cleveland, Mississippi. Mount Cleveland, a volcano in Alaska, is also named after him. In 1895 he became the first U.S. President who was filmed. The first U.S. postage stamp to honor Cleveland appeared in 1923. This twelvecent issue accompanied a thirteencent stamp in the same definitive series that depicted his old rival Benjamin Harrison. Clevelands only two subsequent stamp appearances have been in issues devoted to the full roster of U.S. Presidents, released, respectively, in 1938 and 1986. Clevelands portrait was on the U.S. 1000 bill of series 1928 and series 1934. He also appeared on the first few issues of the 20 Federal Reserve Notes from 1914. Since he was both the 22nd and 24th president, he was featured on two separate dollar coins released in 2012 as part of the Presidential 1 Coin Act of 2005. In 2013, Cleveland was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame. See also Grover Cleveland Birthplace Presidencies of Grover Cleveland Child with Maria Halpin Children with Frances Cleveland Notes Further reading Scholarly studies Bard, Mitchell. Ideology and Depression Politics I Grover Cleveland Presidential Studies Quarterly 1985 15 77 88. Beito, David T. and Beito, Linda Royster,Gold Democrats and the Decline of Classical Liberalism, 1896 1900, Independent Review 4 , 555 575. Blake, Nelson M. Background of Clevelands Venezuelan Policy. American Historical Review 1942 47 259 277. in Jstor Blodgett, Geoffrey. Ethnocultural Realities in Presidential Patronage Grover Clevelands Choices New York History 2000 81 189 210. when a German American leader called for fewer appointments of Irish Americans, Cleveland instead appointed more Germans Blodgett, Geoffrey. The Emergence of Grover Cleveland a Fresh Appraisal New York History 1992 73 132 168. covers Cleveland to 1884 Blum, John. The National Experience Brodsky, Alan. Grover Cleveland A Study in Character , . Cleaver, Nick. Grover Clevelands New Foreign Policy Arbitration, Neutrality, and the Dawn of American Empire . DeSantis, Vincent P. Grover Cleveland Another Look. Hayes Historical Journal 1980 3 41 50. , argues his energy, honesty, and devotion to duty much more than his actual accomplishments established his claim to greatness. Dewey, Davis R. National Problems 1880 1897 , online edition Doenecke, Justus. Grover Cleveland and the Enforcement of the Civil Service Act Hayes Historical Journal 1984 4 44 58. Faulkner, Harold U. Politics, Reform, and Expansion, 1890 1900 , online edition Ford, Henry Jones. The Cleveland Era A Chronicle of the New Order in Politics , short overview online Gould, Lewis. America in the Progressive Era, 1890 1914 Graff, Henry F. Grover Cleveland . , short biography by scholar Grossman, Mark, Political Corruption in America An Encyclopedia of Scandals, Power, and Greed . Hoffman, Karen S. Going Public in the Nineteenth Century Grover Clevelands Repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act Rhetoric Public Affairs 2002 5 57 77. Hirsch, Mark D. William C. Whitney, Modern Warwick , biography of key political associate Hoffman, Karen S. Going Public in the Nineteenth Century Grover Clevelands Repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act Rhetoric and Public Affairs 2002 5 57 77. in Project MUSE Hoffmann, Charles. The depression of the nineties. Journal of Economic History 162 137 164. in JSTOR Hoffmann, Charles. Depression of the nineties an economic history , . Kelley, Robert, Presbyterianism, Jacksonianism and Grover Cleveland, American Quarterly 1966 18 615 636. in JSTOR Klinghard, Daniel P. Grover Cleveland, William McKinley, and the emergence of the president as party leader. Presidential Studies Quarterly 35.4 736760. Lambert, John R. Arthur Pue Gorman Lynch, G. Patrick U.S. Presidential Elections in the Nineteenth Century Why Culture and the Economy Both Mattered. Polity 351 pp. 29 50. in JSTOR, focus on election of 1884 McElroy, Robert. Grover Cleveland, the Man and the Statesman An Authorized Biography Vol. I, Vol. II, old fashioned narrative McFarland, Gerald W. Mugwumps, morals, politics, 1884 1920 McWilliams, Tennant S., James H. Blount, the South, and Hawaiian Annexation. Pacific Historical Review 1988 57 25 46. in JSTOR. Merrill, Horace Samuel. Bourbon Leader Grover Cleveland and the Democratic Party 228 pp Morgan, H. Wayne. From Hayes to McKinley National Party Politics, 1877 1896 . Nevins, Allan. Grover Cleveland A Study in Courage Pulitzer Prizewinning biography, the major resource on Cleveland. Oberholtzer, Ellis Paxson. A History of the United States since the Civil War. Volume V, 1888 1901 . 791 pp comprehensive oldfashioned political history Reitano, Joanne R. The Tariff Question in the Gilded Age The Great Debate of 1888 . . Rhodes, James Ford. History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 1877 1896 online complete old, factual and heavily political, by winner of Pulitzer Prize Sturgis, Amy H. ed. Presidents from Hayes Through McKinley Debating the Issues in Pro and Con Primary Documents . Summers, Mark Wahlgren. Rum, Romanism Rebellion The Making of a President, 1884 . . campaign techniques and issues online edition Tugwell, Rexford Guy, Grover Cleveland Simon Schuster, Inc. . Welch, Richard E. Jr. The Presidencies of Grover Cleveland , scholarly study of the presidential years Wilson, Woodrow, Mr. Cleveland as President Atlantic Monthly pp.289 301 online Wilson later became president Zakaria, Fareed From Wealth to Power Princeton University Press. . Primary sources Cleveland, Grover. The Writings and Speeches of Grover Cleveland online edition Cleveland, Grover. Presidential Problems. online edition Nevins, Allan ed. Letters of Grover Cleveland, 1850 1908 , handbook of the Gold Democrats, who admired Cleveland Sturgis, Amy H. ed. Presidents from Hayes through McKinley, 1877 1901 Debating the Issues in Pro and Con Primary Documents online edition Wilson, William L. The Cabinet Diary of William L. Wilson, 1896 1897 online edition External links Official White House biography Letters and Speeches Text of a number of Clevelands speeches at the Miller Center of Public Affairs Finding Aid to the Grover Cleveland Manuscripts, 18671908 at the New York State Library, accessed May 11, 2016 10 letters written by Grover Cleveland in 188486 Grover Cleveland Personal Manuscripts Media coverage Other Grover Cleveland A Resource Guide, Library of Congress Grover Cleveland A bibliography by The Buffalo History Museum Grover Cleveland Sites in Buffalo, NY A Google Map developed by The Buffalo History Museum Index to the Grover Cleveland Papers at the Library of Congress Essay on Cleveland and each member of his cabinet and First Lady, Miller Center of Public Affairs Life Portrait of Grover Cleveland, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , August 13, 1999 Interview with H. Paul Jeffers on An Honest President The Life and Presidencies of Grover Cleveland , Booknotes Category1837 births Category1908 deaths Category19thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican executioners CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of German descent CategoryAmerican people of Guernsey descent CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryBurials at Princeton Cemetery CategoryConservatism in the United States CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party state governors of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryGovernors of New York CategoryGrover Cleveland family CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryMayors of Buffalo, New York CategoryNew York Democrats CategoryNew York lawyers CategoryNoninterventionism CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law CategoryLawyers from Buffalo, New York CategoryPeople from Caldwell, New Jersey CategoryPeople from Clinton, Oneida County, New York CategoryPeople from Fayetteville, New York CategoryPresidents of the United States CategorySheriffs of Erie County, New York CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1884 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1888 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates,1892
Herbert Clark Hoover was an American engineer, businessman, and politician who served as the 31st President of the United States from 1929 to 1933 during the Great Depression. A Republican, as Secretary of Commerce in the 1920s he introduced Progressive Era themes of efficiency in the business community and provided government support for standardization, efficiency and international trade. As president from 1929 to 1933, his ambitious programs were overwhelmed by the Great Depression, which seemed to get worse every year despite the increasingly largescale interventions he made in the economy. He was defeated in a landslide in 1932 by Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt, and spent the rest of his life as a conservative denouncing big government, liberalism and federal intervention in economic affairs, as Democrats repeatedly used his Depression record to attack conservatism and justify more regulation of the economy. A lifelong Quaker, he became a successful mining engineer around the globe and retired in 1912. In the First World War he built an international reputation as a humanitarian by leading relief efforts in Belgium during the war, and in Eastern Europe afterwards. He headed the U.S. Food Administration during World War I. His reputation as a Progressive businessman fighting for efficiency and elimination of waste was built as the Secretary of Commerce 1921 28. Hoover was a leader in the Efficiency Movement, which held that every institution public and private was riddled with unsuspected inefficiencies. They all could be improved by experts who could identify the problems and solve them. He also believed in the importance of volunteerism and of the role of individuals in society and the economy. In the presidential election of 1928, Hoover easily won the Republican nomination, despite having no electedoffice experience. Although Hoover never raised the religious issue, some of his supporters did in mobilizing antiCatholic sentiment against his opponent Al Smith. Hoover won in a landslide. When the Wall Street Crash of 1929 struck less than eight months after he took office, Hoover tried to combat the ensuing Great Depression in the United States with largescale government public works projects such as the Hoover Dam, and calls on industry to keep wages high. He reluctantly approved the Smoot Hawley Tariff of 1930, which sent foreign trade spiralling down. He believed it was essential to balance the budget despite falling tax revenue, so he raised the tax rates. The economy kept falling, and the unemployment rate rose to 25, with heavy industry, mining, and wheat and cotton farming hit especially hard. This downward spiral, plus his support for prohibition policies that had lost favor, set the stage for Hoovers overwhelming defeat in 1932 by Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt, who promised a New Deal. Most historians agree that Hoovers defeat in the 1932 election was caused primarily by the downward economic spiral, although his strong support for prohibition was also significant. Hoover became a conservative spokesman in opposition to the domestic and foreign policies of the New Deal. He opposed entry into the Second World War and was not called on to serve in any public role during the war. He had better relations with President Harry S. Truman, and Hoover helped produce a number of reports that changed U.S. occupation policy in Germany. Truman also appointed Hoover to head the Hoover Commission, intended to foster greater efficiency throughout the federal bureaucracy, and Hoover served on a similar commission under President Dwight D. Eisenhower. By the time of his death in 1964, he had rehabilitated his image. Nevertheless, Hoover is generally not ranked highly in historical rankings of Presidents of the United States. Family background and early life 1877 Herbert Hoover tintype Herbert Hoover was born on August 10, 1874, in West Branch, Iowa. He is the only President born in that state, and the first born west of the Mississippi River. His father, Jesse Hoover , was a blacksmith and farm implement store owner, of German , GermanSwiss , and English ancestry. Jesse Hoover and his father Eli had moved to Iowa from Ohio twenty years previously. Hoovers mother, Hulda Randall Minthorn , was born in Norwich, Ontario, Canada, and was of English and Irish ancestry. Both of his parents were Quakers. At about age two he contracted the croup. He was so ill that he was momentarily thought to have died, until he was resuscitated by his uncle, John Minthorn. As a child, he was often called by his father my little stick in the mud, since he repeatedly was trapped in the mud while crossing an unpaved street. Hoovers family figured prominently in the towns public prayer life, due almost entirely to Huldas role in her church. His father, noted by the local paper for his pleasant, sunshiny disposition, died in 1880. After working to retire her husbands debts, retain their life insurance, and care for the children, his mother died in 1884, leaving Hoover , his older brother, and his younger sister as orphans. Fellow Quaker Lawrie Tatum was appointed as Hoovers guardian. Herbert Hoover birthplace cottage, West Branch, Iowa After a brief stay with one of his grandmothers in Kingsley, Iowa, Hoover lived the next 18 months with his uncle Allen Hoover in West Branch. In November 1885, he went to Newberg, Oregon, to live with his uncle Dr. John Minthorn, a physician and businessman whose own son had died the year before. The Minthorn household was considered cultured and educational, and imparted a strong work ethic. Observers, including Minthorn himself, describe Hoover as being unhappy with the long days of toil he experienced while staying with the Minthorn household. Hoover attended Friends Pacific Academy , but dropped out at the age of thirteen to become an office assistant for his uncles real estate office in Salem, Oregon. Though he did not attend high school, Hoover attended night school and learned bookkeeping, typing, and mathematics. Hoover entered Stanford University in 1891, its inaugural year, after failing all the entrance exams and then being tutored for the summer in Palo Alto. Hoover claimed to be the very first student at Stanford, by virtue of having been the first person in the first class to sleep in the dormitory. Hoover worked a variety of odd jobs to support himself, and struggled in many of his classes, especially English. But he found a happiness at Stanford that previously eluded him. Hoover had been unsure of his major before arriving at Stanford, but position working for geologist John Casper Branner convinced him to switch his major to geology, and Hoover interned for Branner and the United States Geological Survey during the summer. Though he was shy among fellow students at first, Hoover won election as student treasurer and became known for his distaste for fraternities and sororities. In his senior year, he became smitten with a classmate named Lou Henry, but his financial situation precluded the possibility of marriage. Hoover graduated from Stanford in 1895, in the midst of the Panic of 1893, and initially struggled to find a job. While at the university, he was the student manager of both the baseball and football teams and was a part of the inaugural Big Game versus rival the University of California and friend Herbert Lang.Big Games College Footballs Greatest Rivalries Page 222 Only 10,000 tickets were printed for the inaugural game and 20,000 people showed up. Both Hoover and Lang had to find pots, bowls and any other available receptacles to collect admission fees.Big Games College Footballs Greatest Rivalries Pages 221 222 Stanford won the game. In 1892 Hoover invited Polish composer Ignacy Jan Paderewski to give a benefit concert. Hoover and his associates were unable to pay Paderewski the entire honorarium. The musician after hearing their story returned them the money so they could pay for rental of the concert hall. In 1919 Paderewski, now prime minister of Poland, traveled to America to thank the head of the American Relief Administration for helping Poland. Thats all right, Mr. Paderewski, Hoover replied. Besides, you dont remember it, but you helped me once when I was a student at college and I was in a hole. Mining engineer Australia Herbert Hoover, aged 23 taken in Perth, Western Australia, in 1898 After graduation, Hoover worked in the gold mining districts of Nevada City and Grass Valley, California, before landing a job with the mining engineering firm of Louis Janin. Hoover went to Western Australia in 1897 as an employee of Bewick, Moreing Co., a Londonbased gold mining company. His geological training and work experience were well suited for the firms objectives. He worked at gold mines in Big Bell, Cue, Gwalia, Menzies, and Coolgardie.. His former house in Gwalia is now a historical tourist attraction, and as of 2004, a bed and breakfast inn. Hoover is profiled as a mining pioneer in the Kalgoorlie Miners Hall of Fame, although his biography fails to mention his subsequent role as U.S. President. Hoover first went to Coolgardie, then the center of the Eastern Goldfields, where he worked under Edward Hooper, a company partner. Conditions were harsh in these goldfields even though he got a 5,000 salary . In the Coolgardie and Murchison rangelands on the edge of the Great Victoria Desert, Hoover described the region as a land of black flies, red dust and white heat. He served as a geologist and mining engineer while searching the Western Australian goldfields for investments. A poem and antique mirror gifted by Hoover can still be found today at The Palace Hotel, in KalgoorlieBoulder, Western Australia.The Hoover Mirror on the website of the Palace Hotel. Retrieved August 5, 2017. After being appointed as mine manager at the age of 23, he led a major program of expansion for the Sons of Gwalia gold mine at Gwalia, and brought in many Italian immigrants to cut costs and counter the labour movement of the Australian miners. Hoover became opposed to measures such as the minimum wage and workers compensation, feeling that they were unfair to owners. In 1898, Hoover was promoted to junior partner by his employers, who were pleased with Hoovers talent and devotion to his work. After earning his promotion, he cabled his college sweetheart, Lou Henry, asking her to marry him. After she cabled back her acceptance of the proposal, Hoover briefly returned to the United States to marry her. Hoover and his wife had two children Herbert Charles Hoover and Allan Henry Hoover . Rather than returning to Australia, Hoover and his new wife traveled to China. An open feud had developed between Hoover and his boss Ernest Williams, with Hoover persuading four other mine managers to conspire against his rival. Defusing the situation, the firms principals offered Hoover a compelling promotion that relocated him to China. During his time at Gwalia, Hoover first met Fleury James Lyster, a pioneering metallurgist. In Western Australia friends called Hoover H.C. or the old nickname Hail Columbia. China and other global operations Hoovers work in China revolved around the huge Kaiping Mines. Hoover worked as chief engineer for the Chinese Bureau of Mines, and as general manager for the Chinese Engineering and Mining Corporation.31st President, Herbert Clark Hoover. Presidentialpetmuseum.com . Retrieved on July 14, 2013. Later he worked for Bewick, Moreing Co. as the companys lead engineer. Hoovers wife learned Mandarin Chinese , and he also learned some of the language while he worked in China it is said that they used it during his tenure at the White House when they wanted to foil eavesdroppers. Hoover made recommendations to improve the lot of the Chinese worker, seeking to end the practice of imposing long term servitude contracts and to institute reforms for workers based on merit. The Boxer Rebellion trapped the Hoovers in Tianjin in June 1900. For almost a month, the settlement was under fire, and both dedicated themselves to defense of their city. Hoover himself guided U.S. Marines around Tianjin during the battle, using his knowledge of the local terrain.Hoover, Herbert C. . The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover Years of Adventure 1874 1920 . London Hollis Carter. p. 53 Mrs. Hoover meanwhile devoted her efforts at the various hospitals and even wielded, and willingly and accurately deployed, a .38caliber pistol. Lou Henry, age 17, on a burro and rifleready at Acton, California on August 22, 1891 Hoover was made a partner in Bewick, Moreing Co. on December 18, 1901 and assumed responsibility for various Australian operations and investments. His initial compensation rose to 12,500 annually in addition to a 20 share of profits. The company eventually controlled at one point approximately 50 of gold production in Western Australia. In 1901, Hoover no longer lived in Australia, but he visited the country in 1902, 1903, 1905, and 1907 as an overseas investor. Hoover was also a director of Chinese Engineering and Mining Corporation when it became a supplier of immigrant labor from Southeast Asia for South African mines.Walter Liggett, The Rise of Herbert Hoover The first shipment of almost 2,000 workers arrived in Durban from Qinhuangdao in July 1904. By 1906, the total number of immigrant workers increased to 50,000, almost entirely recruited and shipped by CEMC. When the living and working conditions of the laborers became known, public opposition to the scheme grew and questions were asked in the British Parliament.Mr Winston Churchill speeches in 1906 . Hansard.millbanksystems.com. Retrieved on July 14, 2013. The scheme was abandoned in 1911. In August September 1905, he founded the Zinc Corporation with William Baillieu and others. The leadsilver ore produced at Broken Hill, New South Wales was rich in zinc. But the zinc could not be recovered due to the Sulphide Problem, and was left in the tailings that remained after the silver and lead was extracted.Geoffrey Blainey, The Rise of Broken Hill p. 51 Zinc Corporation proposed to buy the tailings and extract the zinc by a new process. The froth flotation process was then being developed at Broken Hill, although the Zinc Corporation struggled to apply it. Hoover was in Australia in 1905. F.J. Lyster, originally a carpenter before becoming a foreman in the gravity mill, perfected the Lyster Process, which enabled the Zinc Corporation to operate the worlds first selective or differential flotation plant. According to Geoffrey Blainey, though the process was not fully understood, a patent was applied for in May 1912. Hoovers brother, Theodore J. Hoover, also came to Broken Hill. Broken Hill was one of the dreariest places in the world at this time. It lay in the middle of the desert, was unbelievably hot in summer, had no fresh water, no vegetation, and mountains of tailings blew into every crack with every wisp of wind.Hoover, Herbert C. . The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover Years of Adventure 1874 1920 . London Hollis Carter. p. 88 Despite these miserable conditions, Hoover and his associates became suppliers to world industry of zinc and other vital base minerals. Sole proprietor Herbert Hoover in his 30s while a mining engineer In 1908, Hoover became an independent mining consultant, traveling worldwide until the outbreak of World War I in 1914. He left Bewick, Moreing Co and, setting out on his own, eventually ended up with investments on every continent and offices in San Francisco, London, New York City, St. Petersburg, Paris and Mandalay, Burma.Hoover, Herbert C. . The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover Years of Adventure 1874 1920 . London Hollis Carter. p. 99 He specialized in rejuvenating troubled mining operations, taking a share of the profits in exchange for his technical and financial expertise. He had his second successful venture with the British firm Burma Corporation, again producing silver, lead, and zinc in large quantities at the Namtu Bawdwin Mine, where he caught malaria in 1907. He also helped increase copper production in Kyshtym, Russia, through the use of pyritic smelting. Then he agreed to manage one of the Russian Czars Cabinet Mines, located in the Altai Mountains. The oxidized leadzincsilver ore contained copper and gold as well. According to Hoover, It developed probably the greatest and richest single body of ore known in the world before the Communist Revolution. While living in London, noting the American engineers patriotic intensity, some British acquaintances referred to him as the starspangled Hoover. It recalled the nickname he had acquired in the Australian outback Hail Columbia Hoover. The Bawdwin mine ultimately became the chief source of Hoovers fortune. In his spare time, Hoover wrote. His lectures at Columbia and Stanford universities were published in 1909 as Principles of Mining , which became a standard textbook. The book reflects his move towards Progressive ideals, as Hoover came to endorse eighthour workdays and organized labor. Hoover and his wife also published their English translation of the 1556 mining classic De re metallica in 1912. This translation from the Latin of Renaissance author Georgius Agricola is still the most important scholarly version and provides its historical context. By 1914, Hoover was a very wealthy man, with an estimated personal fortune of 4 million. He was once quoted as saying If a man has not made a million dollars by the time he is forty, he is not worth much. By 1914, Hoover stood eventually to obtain what he later described as a large fortune from these Russian industries, probably more than is good for anybody. Sixtysix years after opening the mine in 1897, Hoover still had a partial share in the Sons of Gwalia mine when it finally closed in 1963, just one year before the former Presidents death in New York City in 1964. The successful mine had yielded 55m in gold and 10m in dividends for investors.Hoover, Herbert C. . The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover Years of Adventure 1874 1920 . London Hollis Carter. p. 33 Herbert Hoover, acting as a main investor, financier, mining speculator, and organizer of men, played a major role in the important metallurgical developments that occurred in Broken Hill in the first decade of the twentieth century, developments that had a great impact on the mining and production of silver, lead, and zinc. In later years Hoover thought of himself and his associates as engineering doctors to sick concerns, hence his reputation as the Doctor of sick mines. Humanitarian work Relief in Europe and Belgium Poster for the American Relief Administration for Belgium directed by Hoover. When World War I began in August 1914, Hoover helped organize the return of around 120,000 Americans from Europe. He led 500 volunteers in distributing food, clothing, steamship tickets and cash.The Philanthropy Hall of Fame, Herbert Hoover I did not realize it at the moment, but on August 3, 1914, my career was over forever. I was on the slippery road of public life. Hoover liked to say that the difference between dictatorship and democracy was simple dictators organize from the top down, democracies from the bottom up. When Belgium faced a food crisis after being invaded by Germany in 1914, Hoover undertook an unprecedented relief effort with the Commission for Relief in Belgium . As chairman of the CRB, Hoover worked with the leader of the Belgian Comit National de Secours et dAlimentation , mile Francqui, to feed the entire nation for the duration of the war. The CRB obtained and imported millions of tons of foodstuffs for the CNSA to distribute, and watched over the CNSA to make sure the German army did not appropriate the food. The CRB became a veritable independent republic of relief, with its own flag, navy, factories, mills, and railroads. Private donations and government grants supplied an 11millionamonth budget. For the next two years, Hoover worked 14hour days from London, administering the distribution of over two million tons of food to nine million war victims. In an early form of shuttle diplomacy, he crossed the North Sea forty times to meet with German authorities and persuade them to allow food shipments, becoming an international hero. The Belgian city of Leuven named a prominent square Hooverplein after him. At its peak, Hoovers American Relief Administration fed 10.5 million people daily. Great Britain grew reluctant to support the CRB, preferring instead to emphasize Germanys obligation to supply the relief Winston Churchill, whom Hoover intensely disliked, led a military faction that considered the Belgian relief effort a positive military disaster. During this time, Hoover made a strong impression on the American Ambassador to Great Britain, Walter Page. In a Memoranda dated December 30, 1916, Page wrote Mr. Herbert C. Hoover, Chairman of the Commission for Relief in Belgium, would, if opportunity should offer, make a useful officer in the State Department. He is probably the only man living who has privately negotiated understandings with the British, French, German, Dutch, and Belgian governments. He personally knows and has had direct dealings with these governments, and his transactions with them have involved several hundred million dollars. He is a man of very considerable fortune less than when the war began, for this relief work has cost him much. He was approached on behalf of the British Government with the suggestion that if he would become a British subject the Government would be pleased to give him an important executive post and with the hint that if he succeeded a title might await him. His answer was Ill do what I can for you with pleasure but Ill be damned if Ill give up my American citizenship not on your life Within the last six months two large financial organizations, each independently, have offered him 100,000 a year to enter their service and an industrial company offered him 100,000 to start with. He declined them all. When the Belgian relief work recently struck a financial snag, Hoover by telegraph got the promise of a loan in the United States to the British and French governments for Belgian relief of 150,000,000. U.S. Food Administration After the United States entered the war in April 1917, President Woodrow Wilson appointed Hoover to head the U.S. Food Administration, which was created under the Lever Food Control Act in 1917 to ensure the nations food needs during the war. This was a position he actively sought, though he later claimed it was thrust upon him. He was convinced from his Belgian work that centralization of authority was essential to any relief effort he demanded, and got, great power albeit not as much as he sought. Hoover believed food will win the war and beginning on September 29, this slogan was introduced and put into frequent use. Earning the appellation of food czar, Hoover recruited a volunteer force of hundreds of thousands of women and deployed propaganda in movie theaters, schools, and churches. He carefully selected men to assist in the agency leadership Alonzo Taylor , Robert Taft , Gifford Pinchot and Julius Barnes . Determined to avoid rationing, Hoover established set days for people to avoid eating specified foods and save them for soldiers rations meatless Mondays, wheatless Wednesdays, and when in doubt, eat potatoes. These policies were dubbed Hooverizing by government publicists, in spite of Hoovers continual orders that publicity should not mention him by name. The agency employed a system of price controls and licensing requirements for suppliers to maximize production. Despite efforts to prevent it, some companies reaped great profits. Postwar relief and 1920 election Days after the end of World War I in November 1918, Hoover sailed to Europe. The United States Food Administration became the American Relief Administration , and Hoover was charged with providing food to Central and Eastern Europe. The ARA fed millions, including the inhabitants of Germany and the former Habsburg Empire. U.S. government funding for the ARA expired in the summer of 1919, and Hoover transformed the ARA into a private organization, raising millions of dollars from private donors. Under the auspices of the ARA, the European Childrens Fund fed millions of starving children. In addition to nourishing millions, the ARA also helped the United States avoid a potentially problematic domestic food surplus. In response to criticism over his willingness to grant aid to countries under the sway of Bolshevism, Hoover stated, Twenty million people are starving. Whatever their politics, they shall be fed Reflecting the gratitude of many Europeans, in July 1922, Soviet author Maxim Gorky wrote to Hoover As one of the most powerful individuals in Europe, Hoover became involved in continental politics. He was broadly supportive of Wilsons Fourteen Points, and was appointed by Wilson to the U.S. delegation at the peace conference in Versailles. He urged ratification of the Treaty of Versailles, but opposed harsh reparations for Germany.A Wonder Boy on the Wrong Side of History, Edward Kosner, Wall Street Journal, October 28, 2017 He opposed a monarchist coup in Hungary and demanded the appointment of the moderate Ignacy Jan Paderewski in Poland. He condemned Bolshevism, but warned President Wilson against an intervention in Russia, viewing the White Russian forces as little better and fearing the possibility of a protracted U.S. involvement. Hoover had been littleknown among the American public before 1914, but emerged as perhaps the secondmost famous person in the United States after President Wilson. In the leadup to the 1920 presidential election, Hoover was often mentioned as a potential candidate, but his partisan affiliation was unclear. Hoover particularly appealed to progressives of both parties, who commended his wartime push for higher taxes, criticism of Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer, and advocacy for measures such as the minimum wage, fortyeighthour workweek, and elimination of child labor. Yet Hoovers rags to riches story and wartime leadership made him appealing to many others as well. In March 1920, Hoover publicly declared his allegiance with the GOP, stating that he would not run for but would not refuse the 1920 Republican nomination. Hoover had various reasons for choosing the Republican Party, including a split with Wilson over the Versailles Treaty , and his view that the Democrats would likely lose the 1920 election. However, the conservative Old Guard of the GOP viewed Hoover warily, and his time as Food Czar had also made him numerous enemies among farmers, an important bloc in the GOP. Hoovers candidacy for the GOP nomination fizzled out after his defeat in the California primary by favorite son Hiram Johnson. In the general election, Hoover supported the Republican nominee, Warren G. Harding, who emerged victorious. In 1919, Hoover established the Hoover War Collection at Stanford University. He donated all the files of the Commission for Relief in Belgium, the U.S. Food Administration, and the American Relief Administration, and pledged 50,000 as an endowment. Scholars were sent to Europe to collect pamphlets, society publications, government documents, newspapers, posters, proclamations, and other ephemeral materials related to the war and the revolutions that followed it. The collection was renamed the Hoover War Library in 1922 and is now known as the Hoover Institution. Efficiency After working with the Food Administration, Hoover became president of the Federated American Engineering Societies.Republicans and Labor 1919 1929Antitrust and Regulation During World War I and the Republican Era, 1917 1932 Hoovers design was set on increasing efficiency and reducing waste.Mechanical Engineering, Volume 43 As president of the FAES, Hoover constructed a plan to study waste in the industrial sector, and he had a strong focus on labor matters.Herbert Hoover As Secretary of Commerce Studies in New Era Thought and Practice The result was a 400page report titled Waste in Industry ,The Life of Herbert Hoover Imperfect Visionary, 1918 1928 which was a highly publicized report at the time.Engineers Unite to Stop Wastes of Industries, Cornell Daily Sun When Hoover became Commerce Secretary, he resigned from the FAES.American Engineering Council meeting of executive board Washington, September 30 Waste in Industry served as a blueprint for the Department of Commerce for the next several years.Herbert Hoovers Last Laugh The Enduring Significance of the Associative State in the U.S. Secretary of Commerce Assistants William McCracken Walter Drake with Secretary Hoover After his election as president in 1920, Harding rewarded Hoover for his support, offering to appoint him as either Secretary of the Interior or Secretary of Commerce. Expecting opposition from the Republicancontrolled Senate, Hoover initially decided to refuse a Cabinet position, but Harding paired Hoovers nomination with that of Andrew Mellon, who many Republicans hoped would become Secretary of the Treasury. Secretary of Commerce was considered a minor Cabinet post, with limited and vaguely defined responsibilities, but Hoover decided to accept the position. Hoover remained in office until 1928, serving in both the Harding and Coolidge administrations. Hoover envisioned the Commerce Department as the hub of the nations growth and stability. From Harding he demanded, and received, authority to coordinate economic affairs throughout the government. He created many subdepartments and committees, overseeing and regulating everything from manufacturing statistics, the census and radio, to air travel. In some instances he seized control of responsibilities from other Cabinet departments when he deemed that they were not carrying out their responsibilities well. He became known as the Secretary of Commerce and UnderSecretary of all other departments. Many of Hoovers efforts as Commerce Secretary centered on eliminating waste and increasing efficiency in business and industry. This included reducing labor losses from trade disputes and seasonal fluctuations, reducing industrial losses from accident and injury, and reducing the amount of crude oil spilled during extraction and shipping. One major achievement was to promote product standardizations. He promoted international trade by opening overseas offices to advise businessmen. Hoover was especially eager to promote Hollywood films overseas. His Own Your Own Home campaign was a collaboration to promote ownership of singlefamily dwellings, with groups such as the Better Houses in America movement, the Architects Small House Service Bureau, and the Home Modernizing Bureau. He worked with bankers and the savings and loan industry to promote the new longterm home mortgage, which dramatically stimulated home construction. Hoover with President Harding at a baseball game in 1921. Hoovers detractors wondered why he did not do anything to reapportion congress after the 1920 United States Census which saw an increase in urban and immigrant populations. The 1920 Census was the first and only Decennial Census where the results were not used to reapportion Congress which ultimately influenced the 1928 Electoral College and impacted the Presidential Election. As secretary and later as President, Hoover revolutionized relations between business and government. Rejecting the adversarial stance of Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson, he sought to make the Commerce Department a powerful service organization, empowered to forge cooperative voluntary partnerships between government and business. This philosophy is often called associationalism. Both the U.S. Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission opposed Hoovers goals, but the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Maple Flooring Manufacturers Assn. v. United States 268 U.S. 563 that Hoovers policies served the public interest by producing fairer price levels and avoiding waste. Radio and air travel Herbert Hoover listening to a radio receiver Hoovers radio conferences played a key role in the early organization, development and regulation of radio broadcasting. Prior to the Radio Act of 1927, the Secretary of Commerce was unable to deny radio licensing or reassign broadcast frequencies. With help from supporters Senator Dill and Representative White, Hoover brought the issue of radio control to the Senate floor. Hoover fought for more power to control the proliferation of licensed radio stations . With help from Dill and White, Hoover promoted the DillWhite Bill which eventually would become the Radio Act of 1927. This act allowed the government to intervene and abolish radio stations that were deemed nonuseful to the public. Hoovers attempts at regulating radio were not supported by all Congressmen, and he received much opposition from the Senate and from radio station owners. However, Hoovers contributions to regulate radio in its infancy heavily influenced the modern radio system. Hoover was also influential in the early development of air travel. He sought to create a thriving private industry boosted by indirect government subsidies. He encouraged the development of emergency landing fields and required all runways to be equipped with lights and radio beams. He also encouraged farmers to make use of planes for crop dusting. In light of his efforts, Washington, D.C. named its first airport Hoover Field. Traffic conferences As Commerce Secretary, Hoover also hosted two national conferences on street traffic, in 1924 and 1926 . Collectively the meetings were called the National Conference on Street and Highway Safety. Hoovers chief objective was to address the growing casualty toll of traffic accidents, but the scope grew and soon embraced motor vehicle standards, rules of the road, and urban traffic control. He left the invited interest groups to negotiate agreements among themselves, which were then presented for adoption by states and localities. Because automotive trade associations were the best organized, many of the positions taken by the conferences reflected their interests. The conferences issued a model Uniform Vehicle Code for adoption by the states, and a Model Municipal Traffic Ordinance for adoption by cities. Both were widely influential, promoting greater uniformity between jurisdictions and tending to promote the automobiles priority in city streets.Peter D. Norton, Fighting Traffic The Dawn of the Motor Age in the American City , pp. 178 197 Mississippi flood The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 broke the banks and levees of the lower Mississippi River in early 1927, resulting in flooding of millions of acres and leaving 1.5 million people displaced from their homes. Although such a disaster did not fall under the duties of the Commerce Department, the governors of six states along the Mississippi specifically asked for Herbert Hoover in the emergency. President Coolidge appointed Hoover to coordinate the response to the flood. Hoover personally crisscrossed the Mississippi Valley, giving speeches and coordinating the response. He established over one hundred tent cities and a fleet of more than six hundred vessels, and raised 17 million. In large part due to his leadership during the flood crisis, by 1928, Hoover had begun to overshadow President Coolidge himself. The treatment of AfricanAmericans during the disaster endangered Hoovers reputation as a humanitarian. Local officials brutalized black farmers and prevented them from leaving relief camps, aid intended for AfricanAmerican sharecroppers was often given instead to the landowners, and black men often were conscripted by locals into forced labor, sometimes at gun point.Kosar, Kevin R. . Disaster Response and the Appointment of a Recovery Czar The Executive Branchs Response to the Flood of 1927 U.S. Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service, pp. 9 10. Washington D.C. Knowing the potential damage to his presidential hopes if this became public, Hoover struck a deal with Robert Russa Moton, the prominent AfricanAmerican successor to Booker T. Washington as president of the Tuskegee Institute. In exchange for keeping the sufferings of AfricanAmericans quiet, Hoover promised unprecedented influence for AfricanAmericans should he become president. Moton agreed, and following the accommodationist philosophy of Washington, he worked actively to conceal the information from the media.Robert Moton and the Colored Advisory Commission, PBS.org Presidential election of 1928 Republican nomination When President Calvin Coolidge announced in August 1927 that he would not seek a second full term of office in the 1928 presidential election, Hoover became the leading Republican candidate, despite the fact Coolidge was lukewarm on Hoover, often deriding his ambitious and popular Commerce Secretary as Wonder Boy. Coolidge had been reluctant to choose Hoover as his successor on one occasion he remarked that for six years that man has given me unsolicited advice all of it bad. I was particularly offended by his comment to shit or get off the pot. Even so, Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing the popular Commerce Secretarys nomination. Prior to the 1928 Republican National Convention, many wary Republican leaders cast about for an alternative candidate such as Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon, former Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes, or Coolidge. But no challenger emerged, and Hoover won the presidential nomination on the first ballot of the convention. The delegates considered nominating incumbent Vice President Charles Dawes to be Hoovers running mate. But Coolidge remarked that this would be a personal affront to him. The convention instead selected Senator Charles Curtis of Kansas. Hoover accepted the nomination at Stanford Stadium, telling a huge crowd that he would continue the policies of the Harding and Coolidge administration. General election 1928 electoral vote results. Hoover campaigned for efficiency and the Republican record of prosperity against Democrat Alfred E. Smith. Smith likewise was a proponent of efficiency earned as governor of New York. Both candidates were probusiness, and each promised to improve conditions for farmers, reform immigration laws, and maintain America s isolationist foreign policy. Where they differed was on the Volstead Act which outlawed the sale of liquor and beer. Smith was a wet who called for its repeal, whereas Hoover gave limited support for prohibition, calling it an experiment noble in purpose. His use of experiment suggested it was not permanent. While Smith won extra support among Catholics in the big cities, he was also the target of intense antiCatholicism from some Protestant communities, especially amongst Southern Baptists and German Lutherans.Edmund A. Moore, A Catholic runs for President The campaign of 1928 by Edmund Arthur Moore Overall the religious factor worked to the advantage of Hoover, although he took no part in it. Historians agree that Hoover s national reputation and the booming economy, combined with deep splits in the Democratic Party over religion and prohibition, guaranteed his landslide victory with 58 percent of the popular vote.Elesha Coffman, The Religious Issue in Presidential Politics, American Catholic Studies, 1194 pp 1 20 Hoover s appeal to southern white voters succeeded in cracking the Solid South , winning the Democratic strongholds of Florida, North Carolina, Virginia, Texas and Tennessee, and nearly taking Alabama on support from Appalachian counties the Deep South continued to support Smith as the Democratic candidate. This was the first time that a Republican candidate for president had carried Texas. Hoover and the national party had pursued a lilywhite southern strategy to resuscitate the Republican Party in the South, purging black Republicans from leadership positions in the southern wing of the G.O.P. This outraged the black leadership, which largely broke from the Republican Party, and began seeking candidates who supported civil rights within the Democratic Party.Lewis, David Levering . W. E. B. Du Bois The Fight for Equality and the American Century, 1919 1963 . pp. 245 247 In 1956, W. E. B. Du Bois, a leader in the NAACP in the 1920s, would recall that in 1928, Negroes faced absolute dilemma. Neither Hoover nor Smith wanted the Negro vote and both publicly insulted us. Presidency Inauguration of Hoover Following his inauguration, Hoover held a press conference on his first day in office, promising a new phase of press relations.Rouse, Robert. Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference 93 years young , American Chronicle , March 15, 2006 He asked the group of journalists to elect a committee to recommend improvements to the White House press conference. Hoover declined to use a spokesman, instead asking reporters to directly quote him and giving them handouts with his statements ahead of time. In his first 120 days in office, he held more regular and frequent press conferences than any other President, before or since. However, he changed his press policies after the 1929 stock market crash, screening reporters and greatly reducing his availability. Hoover entered office with a plan to reform the nations regulatory system, believing that a federal bureaucracy should have limited regulation over a countrys economic system.Joyce, C. Alan. World Almanac 2009 , World Almanac Books, 2009, p. 524 Hoover sought a balance among labor, capital, and the government, and he has been variously labeled a corporatist or associationalist. Hoover saw the presidency as a vehicle for improving the conditions of all Americans by encouraging publicprivate cooperation what he termed volunteerism. He tended to oppose governmental coercion or intervention, as he thought they infringed on American ideals of individualism and selfreliance. Hoover made extensive use of commissions to study issues and propose solutions, and many of those commissions were sponsored by private donors rather than by the government. One of the commissions started by Hoover, the Research Committee on Social Trends, was tasked with surveying the entirety of American society. Lou Henry Hoover was an activist First Lady. She typified the new woman of the post World War I era intelligent, robust, and aware of multiple female possibilities.Nancy Beck Young, Lou Henry Hoover Activist First Lady White House physician Admiral Joel T. Boone invented the sport Hooverball to keep Hoover fit while in the White House. Hooverball is a combination of volleyball and tennis, played with a medicine ball. Hoover and several staff members played it each morning, earning them the nickname Medicine Ball Cabinet . Domestic policies Civil rights Hoover seldom mentioned civil rights while he was President. He believed that AfricanAmericans and other races could improve themselves with education and individual initiative.Lisio, Donald J. Hoover, Blacks, LilyWhites A Study of Southern Strategies , University of North Carolina Press, 1985 He opposed federal antilynching laws, and when lynchings occurred in the South, including one incident linked to his partys efforts to Republicanize southern states, he offered only verbal condemnation. First Lady Lou Hoover defied custom and invited the wife of Republican Oscar De Priest, the only AfricanAmerican member in Congress, to tea at the White House. Booker T. Washington was the previous AfricanAmerican to have dined at the White House, with Theodore Roosevelt in 1901.The American Franchise, American President, An On Line Reference Resource, Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia Charles Curtis, the nations first Native American Vice President, was from the Kaw tribe in Kansas.Charles Curtis, 31st Vice President , U.S. Senate, Art and History, Senate.gov Hoovers humanitarian and Quaker reputation, along with Curtis as a vicepresident, gave special meaning to his Indian policies. His Quaker upbringing influenced his views that Native Americans needed to achieve economic selfsufficiency. As President, he appointed Charles J. Rhoads as commissioner of Indian affairs. Hoover supported Rhoads commitment to Indian assimilation and sought to minimize the federal role in Indian affairs. His goal was to have Indians acting as individuals and to assume the responsibilities of citizenship granted with the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924. Great Depression On taking office, Hoover said that given the chance to go forward with the policies of the last eight years, we shall soon with the help of God, be in sight of the day when poverty will be banished from this nation. Having seen the fruits of prosperity brought by technological progress, many shared Hoovers optimism, and the already bullish stock market climbed even higher on Hoovers accession. But within months of taking office, the Stock Market Crash of 1929 occurred, and the worldwide economy began to spiral downward into the Great Depression.Glen Jeansonne, The Life of Herbert Hoover Fighting Quaker, 1928 1933 The causes of the Great Depression remain a matter of debate, but Hoover viewed a lack of confidence in the financial system as the fundamental economic problem facing the nation. He sought to avoid direct federal intervention, believing that the best way to bolster the economy was through the strengthening of businesses such as banks and railroads. He also feared that allowing individuals on the dole would permanently weaken the country. Instead, Hoover strongly believed that local governments and private giving should address the needs of individuals. A reserved man with a fear of public speaking, Hoover allowed his political enemies to define him as cold, incompetent, reactionary, and outoftouch. Early policies Hoover pursued many policies in an attempt to pull the country out of depression, while attempting to restrain the federal government from becoming directly involved in commercial affairs. In the days following Black Tuesday, Hoover gathered business and labor leaders, asking them to avoid wage cuts and work stoppages while the country faced what he believed would be a short recession similar to the Depression of 1920 21. Some economists, such as Lee Ohanian, point to the resulting wage rigidity as a key cause of the severity of the Great Depression. Hoover also authorized the Mexican Repatriation program to help unemployed Mexican citizens return home. The program was largely a forced migration of approximately 500,000 people to Mexico, and continued until 1937. In the spring of 1930, Hoover acquired from Congress an additional 100 million to continue the Federal Farm Board lending and purchasing policies. At the end of 1929, the FFB established the National Wool Marketing Corporation , a national wool cooperative made up of 30 state associations.Harris Gaylord Warren, Herbert Hoover and the Great Depression , p. 175. Hoover also supported new public works projects, although his fear of budget deficits led him to oppose expansive projects such as that contemplated by the Muscle Shoals Bill, which sought to establish government production and distribution of power in the Tennessee Valley. In autumn 1930, Hoover established the Presidents Organization for Unemployment Relief, which issues press releases urging companies to hire. Hoover had taken office hoping to raise agricultural tariffs in order to help farmers reeling from the farm crisis of the 1920s, but his attempt to raise agricultural tariffs became connected with attempts to raise tariffs for other goods. In June 1930, over the objection of many economists, Congress approved and Hoover reluctantly signed into law the Smoot Hawley Tariff Act. The legislation raised tariffs on thousands of imported items. The intent of the act was to encourage the purchase of Americanmade products by increasing the cost of imported goods, while raising revenue for the federal government and protecting farmers. However, economic depression had spread worldwide, and Canada, France and other nations retaliated by raising tariffs on imports from the U.S. The result was to contract international trade, and worsen the Depression.Kumiko Koyama, The Passage of the SmootHawley Tariff Act Why Did the President Sign the Bill Journal of Policy History 212 pp. 163 86 Progressive Republicans such as Senator Borah were outraged when Hoover signed the bill, and Hoovers relations with that wing of the party never recovered. Later policies For much of his presidency, Hoover opposed congressional proposals to provide federal relief, and he feared that Congress would impose a federal relief program that would infringe on the prerogatives of state and local governments and philanthropic organizations. Hoover created the National Credit Corporation, a voluntary association of bankers, but the organization did not manage to save banks or ease credit as Hoover had hoped it would. As the Great Depression continued, Hoover finally heeded calls for more direct federal intervention, though he vetoed a bill that would have allowed direct federal lending to individuals. In January 1932, Hoover signed a bill creating the Reconstruction Finance Corporation . The RFCs initial goal was to provide governmentsecured loans to financial institutions, railroads, and local governments to continue relief programs. The RFC saved numerous businesses from failure, but it failed to stimulate commercial lending as Hoover had hoped, partly because it was run by conservative bankers unwilling to make riskier loans. The RFC would be adopted by Roosevelt and greatly expanded as part of his New Deal.Joseph R. Mason, The political economy of Reconstruction Finance Corporation assistance during the Great Depression. Explorations in Economic History 402 101 121. With the RFC failing to stem the economic crisis, Hoover signed the Emergency Relief and Construction Act, a major public works bill, in July 1932. Throughout his presidency, Hoover defended the gold standard, and derided any other monetary system as collectivism. Hoover and Senator Carter Glass, another gold standard proponent, recognized that they needed to stop deflation by encouraging the lending of credit. Hoover was instrumental in passing the Glass Steagall Act of 1932, which allowed for prime rediscounting at the Federal Reserve, in turn allowing further inflation of credit and bank reserves. In July 1932, Hoover signed the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, establishing 12 district banks overseen by a Federal Home Loan Bank Board in a manner similar to the Federal Reserve System. In 1930, unemployment stood at 8.9, and many assumed that the United States was just in another recession. But by 1932, unemployment had reached 24.9, businesses had defaulted on record numbers of loans, and more than 5,000 banks had failed, especially small rural banks.Great Depression in the United States, Microsoft Encarta Archived November 1, 2009 The homeless lived in shantytowns they called Hoovervilles. Herbert Hoover in the Oval Office with Ted Joslin, 1932 Taxes, revenues, and deficits National debt as a fraction of GNP up from 20 to 40 under Hoover. From Historical Statistics US Hoover was a firm believer in balanced budgets, and sought to avoid a budget deficit by greatly increasing tax rates on the wealthy. To pay for government programs and to make up for revenue lost due to the Depression, Hoover signed the Revenue Act of 1932. The act increased taxes across the board, so that top earners were taxed at 63 on their net income up from 25 when Herbert Hoover took office. The 1932 Act also increased the tax on the net income of corporations from 12 to 13.75.James Ciment. Encyclopedia of the Great Depression and the New Deal . Sharpe Reference, 2001. p. 396 Additionally, under Hoover, the estate tax was doubled and corporate taxes were raised by almost 15. Also, a check tax took effect, placing a 2cent tax on all bank checks. Economists William D. Lastrapes and George Selgin conclude that the check tax was an important contributing factor to that periods severe monetary contraction. Despite the passage of the Revenue Act, the federal government continued to run a budget deficit. Herbert and Lou Henry Hoover aboard a train in Illinois. Foreign relations According to Leuchtenberg, Hoover was the last American president to take office with no conspicuous need to pay attention to the rest of the world. But during Hoovers term, the world order established with the 1919 Treaty of Versailles began to crumble. As president, Hoover largely made good on his pledge made prior to assuming office not to interfere in Latin Americas internal affairs. In 1930, he released the Clark Memorandum, a rejection of the Roosevelt Corollary and a move towards noninterventionism in Latin America. Hoover did not completely refrain from the use of the military in Latin American affairs he thrice threatened intervention in the Dominican Republic, and he sent warships to El Salvador to support the government against a leftwing revolution. But he wound down the Banana Wars, ending the occupation of Nicaragua and nearly bringing an end to the occupation of Haiti. Franklin Roosevelts Good Neighbor policy would continue the trend towards noninterventionism in Latin America. Though the United States remained outside of the League of Nations, Hoover showed a willingness to work within multilateral structures. Hoover pursued United States membership in the Permanent Court of International Justice, but the Senate never voted on his proposal. The Senate also defeated Hoovers proposed Saint Lawrence Seaway Treaty with Canada. In 1930, the United States and other major naval powers signed the London Naval Treaty, an extension of the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty, which sought to prevent a naval arms race. The treaty represented the first time that the naval powers had agreed to cap their tonnage of auxiliary vessels , but the treaty failed to include France or Italy. The treaty provoked a nationalist backlash in Japan due to its reconfirmation of the 553 ratio which limited Japan to a smaller fleet than the United States or the United Kingdom. At the 1932 World Disarmament Conference, Hoover urged worldwide cutbacks in armaments and the outlawing of tanks and bombers, but his proposals were not adopted. In 1931, Japan invaded Manchuria, defeating the Republic of Chinas military forces and establishing Manchukuo, a puppet state. The Hoover administration deplored the invasion, but also sought to avoid antagonizing the Japanese, fearing that taking too strong a stand would weaken the moderate forces in the Japanese government. In response to the Japanese invasion, Hoover and Secretary of State Henry Stimson outlined the Stimson Doctrine, which held that the United States would not recognize territories gained by force. The Hoover administration based this declaration on the 1928 KelloggBriand Pact, in which several nations renounced war and promised to peacefully solve disputes. In the aftermath of invasion of Manchuria, Stimson and other members of the Cabinet came to believe that war with Japan might be inevitable, though Hoover continued to push for disarmament among the world powers.Richard N. Current, The Stimson Doctrine and the Hoover Doctrine, American Historical Review Vol. 59, No. 3 , pp.513 42 in JSTOR In 1931, Hoover issued the Hoover Moratorium, calling for a oneyear halt in World War I reparation payments. Hoover also made U.S. bankers agree to refrain from demanding payment on private loans from Germans. Hoover hoped that the moratorium would help stabilize the European economy, which he viewed as a major cause of economic troubles in the United States. As the moratorium neared its expiration the following year, an attempt to find a permanent solution was made at the Lausanne Conference of 1932. A working compromise was never established, and reparations payments virtually stopped.Halina Parafianowicz, Hoovers Moratorium and Some Aspects of American Policy Towards Eastern and Central Europe in 1931, American Studies . v. 6 pp 63 84. Bonus Army Thousands of World War I veterans and their families demonstrated and camped out in Washington, DC, during June 1932, calling for immediate payment of a bonus that had been promised by the World War Adjusted Compensation Act in 1924 for payment in 1945. Although offered money by Congress to return home, some members of the Bonus Army remained. Washington police attempted to remove the demonstrators from their camp, but they were outnumbered and unsuccessful. Shots were fired by the police in a futile attempt to attain order, and two protesters were killed while many officers were injured. Hoover sent U.S. Army forces led by General Douglas MacArthur and helped by lower ranking officers Dwight D. Eisenhower and George S. Patton to stop a march. MacArthur, believing he was fighting a communist revolution, chose to clear out the camp with military force. In the ensuing clash, hundreds of civilians were injured. Hoover had sent orders that the Army was not to move on the encampment, but MacArthur chose to ignore the command. Hoover was incensed, but refused to reprimand MacArthur. The entire incident was another devastating negative for Hoover in the 1932 election. That led New York governor and Democratic presidential candidate Franklin Roosevelt to declare of Hoover There is nothing inside the man but jelly 1932 reelection campaign Hoover addresses a large crowd in his 1932 campaign. Despite the economic calamity facing the nation and his dim hopes for reelection, Hoover faced little opposition for renomination at the 1932 Republican National Convention. Some Republicans talked of nominating Coolidge, former Vice President Charles Dawes, or Senator Hiram Johnson, but all passed on the opportunity to challenge Hoover. Curtis was renominated as Hoovers running mate. Franklin D. Roosevelt won the presidential nomination on the third ballot of the 1932 Democratic National Convention, defeating the 1928 Democratic nominee, Al Smith. Speaker of the House John Nance Garner was nominated as Roosevelts running mate. By 1932, the radio was in 12 million homes, changing the nature of presidential campaigns. No longer could presidents change the content of their speeches for each audience anyone with a radio could listen to every major speech. Hoover originally planned to make only one or two major speeches, and to leave the rest of the campaigning to proxies, as sitting presidents had traditionally done. However, encouraged by Republican pleas and outraged by Democratic claims, Hoover entered the public fray. In his nine major radio addresses Hoover primarily defended his administration and his philosophy of government. Hoover urged voters to hold to the foundations of experience, rejecting the notion that government interventionism could save the country from the Depression. 1932 electoral vote results. In his campaign trips around the country, Hoover was faced with perhaps the most hostile crowds of any sitting president. Besides having his train and motorcades pelted with eggs and rotten fruit, he was often heckled while speaking, and on several occasions, the Secret Service halted attempts to kill Hoover by disgruntled citizens, including capturing one man nearing Hoover carrying sticks of dynamite, and another already having removed several spikes from the rails in front of the Presidents train. The Democrats attacked Hoover as the cause of the Great Depression, and for being indifferent to the suffering of millions. As Governor of New York, Roosevelt had called on the New York legislature to provide aid for the needy, establishing Roosevelts reputation for being more favorable toward government interventionism during the economic crisis. Fausold rejects the notion that the two nominees were similar ideologically, pointing to differences between the two on federal spending on public works, agricultural issues, Prohibition, and the tariff. Hoovers attempts to vindicate his administration fell on deaf ears, as much of the public blamed his administration for the depression. Roosevelt won 57.4 percent of the popular vote compared to Hoovers 39.7. Hoover s popular vote was reduced by nineteen percent from his result in the 1928 election, and he carried just five Northeastern states and Delaware. Roosevelt became the first Democratic presidential nominee to win a majority of the popular vote since the Civil War. Postpresidency Hoover with Franklin D. Roosevelt, March 4, 1933 Hoover departed from Washington in March 1933, bitter at his election loss and continuing unpopularity. Upon leaving office, Hoover was the only living exPresident for nearly 20 years, until Harry Truman left office in 1953. The Hoovers went first to New York City, where they stayed for a while in the Waldorf Astoria hotel. Later that spring, they returned to California to their Stanford residence. Hoover enjoyed returning to the mens clubs that he had long been involved with, including the Bohemian Club, the PacificUnion Club, and the University Club in San Francisco.Dulfer Hoag. Our Society Blue Book , pp. 177 78. San Francisco, Dulfer Hoag, 1925 Hoover and his wife lived in Palo Alto until her death in 1944, at which point Hoover began to live permanently at the Waldorf Astoria. Hoover liked to drive his car, accompanied by his wife or a friend , and drive on wandering journeys, visiting Western mining camps or small towns where he often went unrecognized, or heading up to the mountains, or deep into the woods, to go fishing in relative solitude. A year before his death, his own fishing days behind him, he published Fishing For Fun And To Wash Your Soul , the last of more than sixteen books in his lifetime. In 1939, Hoover became the first Honorary Chairman of Tolstoy Foundation in Valley Cottage, New York, and served in this capacity until his death in 1964.Valley Cottage, New York TF Origins. Tolstoy Foundation. Retrieved on July 14, 2013. Hoovers book, Fishing For Fun And To Wash Your Soul Opposition to Roosevelt Hoover continued to closely follow national events after his retirement, becoming a constant critic of Franklin Roosevelt. In response to continued attacks on his character and presidency, Hoover wrote more than two dozen books, including The Challenge to Liberty , which harshly criticized the New Deal. Hoover feared that the country had surrendered its freedom of mind and spirit to the New Deal. He described the National Recovery Administration and Agricultural Adjustment Administration as fascistic, and the 1933 Banking Act as a move to gigantic socialism. Hoover fishing in his home state of Iowa. Only 58 when he left office, Hoover held out hope for another term during the 1930s. At the 1936 Republican National Convention, Hoovers speech attacking the New Deal was well received, but the nomination went to Kansas Governor Alf Landon. In the general election, Hoover campaigned for Landons unsuccessful campaign with numerous wellpublicized speeches attacking New Deal liberalism.Brant Short, The Rhetoric of the PostPresidency Herbert Hoovers Campaign against the New Deal, 1934 1936. Presidential Studies Quarterly 212 333 350. in JSTOR Though Hoover was eager to oppose Roosevelt at every turn, and Senator Arthur Vandenberg and other Republicans urged the stillunpopular Hoover to remain out of the fray during the debate over Roosevelts proposed Judiciary Reorganization Bill of 1937. At the 1940 Republican National Convention, Hoover again hoped for the presidential nomination, and was dismayed when it went to the internationalist Wendell Willkie. Hoover remained popular in Europe, and he was honored in France and Belgium. During a 1938 trip to Europe, Hoover met with Adolf Hitler and stayed at Hermann Grings hunting lodge. Hoover expressed dismay at the persecution of Jews in Germany and believed that Hitler was mad, but did not present a threat to the U.S. Instead, Hoover believed that Roosevelt posed the biggest threat to peace, as he believed that Roosevelt provoked Japan and discouraged France and the United Kingdom from reaching an accommodation with Germany. After the September 1939 invasion of Poland by Germany, Hoover opposed United States intervention in World War II, including the LendLease policy. Hoover became a vocal supporter of providing relief to countries in Nazioccupied Europe. He was instrumental in creating the Commission for Polish Relief and Finnish Relief Fund.Foreign Relief Activities, Herbert Hoover Public Positions and Honors In 1939, Roosevelt asked Hoover to the White House for advice on getting aid to Poland, but Hoover turned down the offer. Much to his own frustration, Hoover was not called upon to serve after the United States entered World War II due to his differences with Roosevelt and his continuing unpopularity. During a radio broadcast on June 29, 1941, one week after the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, Hoover disparaged any tacit alliance between the U.S. and the USSR by saying Post World War II Herbert Hoover with his son Allan and his grandson Andrew , 1950 Following World War II, Hoover became friends with President Harry S. Truman despite their ideological differences. Hoover joked that they were for many years the sole members of the trade union of former Presidents. Because of Hoovers experience with Germany at the end of World War I, in 1946 President Truman selected the former president to tour Germany to ascertain the food needs of the occupied nation. Hoover toured what was to become West Germany in Hermann Grings old train coach and produced a number of reports critical of U.S. occupation policy. The economy of Germany had sunk to the lowest level in a hundred years. He stated in one report On Hoovers initiative, a school meals program in the American and British occupation zones of Germany was begun on April 14, 1947. The program served 3,500,000 children aged six through 18. A total of 40,000 tons of American food was provided during the Hooverspeisung . In 1947, Truman appointed Hoover to a commission, which elected him chairman, to reorganize the executive departments. This became known as the Hoover Commission. Led by Hoover, the commission recommended changes designed to strengthen the presidents ability to manage the federal government. Though Hoover had opposed FDRs concentration of power in the 1930s, he believed that a stronger presidency was required with the advent of Atomic Age. In 1953, Hoover was appointed to a similar commission by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. Despite the appointment, Hoover disliked Eisenhower, faulting the latters failure to roll back the New Deal. Hoovers official White House portrait painted by Elmer Wesley Greene. Despite his advancing years, Hoover continued to work nearly fulltime both on writing , as well as overseeing the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, which housed not only his own professional papers, but also those of a number of other former high ranking governmental and military servants. He also threw himself into fundraising for the Boys Clubs , which became his pet charity. In 1958, Congress passed the Former Presidents Act, offering a 25,000 yearly pension to each former president. Hoover, who was the only other living former president, took the pension even though he did not need the money reportedly, he did so to avoid embarrassing former President Truman whose precarious financial status played a role in the laws enactment. Final years and death Hoover was the only living former Republican president between his last day in office in 1933 and Eisenhowers last day in office in 1961. Starting with the 1948 convention, Hoover was feted as the guest of farewell ceremonies, with the unspoken assumption that the aging former President might not survive until the next convention. In 1960, Hoover appeared at his final Republican National Convention. Joking to the delegates, he said, Apparently, my last three goodbyes didnt take. Although he lived to see the 1964 convention, ill health prevented him from attending, and his absence was acknowledged in presidential nominee Barry Goldwaters acceptance speech. In 1962, Hoover had a malignant intestinal tumor removed. Ten months later he had severe gastrointestinal bleeding and seemed terminally ill and frail, but his mind was clear and he maintained a great deal of correspondence. Although the illness would get worse over time, he refused to be hospitalized. Hoover died following massive internal bleeding at the age of 90 in his New York City suite at 1135a.m. on October 20, 1964, 31 years, seven months, and sixteen days after leaving office. At the time of his death, he had the longest retirement of any President. Former President Jimmy Carter surpassed the length of Hoovers retirement on September 7, 2012. At the time of Hoovers death he was the second longestlived president after John Adams both were since surpassed by Gerald Ford, George H. W. Bush, Ronald Reagan, and Jimmy Carter. He had outlived by 20 years his wife, Lou Henry Hoover, who had died in 1944, and he was the last living member of both the Harding and Coolidge administrations. By the time of his death, he had rehabilitated his image. His birthplace in Iowa and an Oregon home where he lived as a child, became National Landmarks during his lifetime. His Rapidan fishing camp in Virginia, which he had donated to the government in 1933, is now a National Historic Landmark within the Shenandoah National Park. Hoover and his wife are buried at the Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum in West Branch, Iowa. Hoover was honored with a state funeral, the last of three in a span of 12 months, coming as it did just after the deaths of President John F. Kennedy and General Douglas MacArthur. Former Chaplain of the Senate Frederick Brown Harris officiated. All three had two things in common the commanding general of the Military District of Washington during those funerals was Army Major General Philip C. Wehle and the riderless horse was Black Jack, who also served in that role during Lyndon B. Johnsons funeral. Writing In 1912 Hoover published the first English edition of the medieval mining compendium De Re Metallica . Reprinted and still in print as It was translated from Latin by himself and his wife, who was a geologist and proficient in Latin. It remains the standard English translation. Hoover began his magnum opus Freedom Betrayed in 1944 as part of a proposed autobiography. This turned into a significant work critiquing the foreign policy of the United States during the period from the 1930s to 1945. Essentially an attack on the statesmanship of Franklin D. Roosevelt, Hoover completed this work in his 90th year but it was not published until the historian George H. Nash took on the task of editing it. Significant themes are his belief that the western democratic powers should have let Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia assail and weaken each other, and opposition to the British guarantee of Polands independence. Other works include Principles of Mining Food Guide for War Service at Home Prepared under the direction of the United States Food Administration Preface to a report of the United States Food Administration American Individualism The Challenge to Liberty American Ideals Versus the New Deal The Problems Of Lasting Peace Prefaces to Peace The Memoirs Of Herbert Hoover 1874 1920 Years Of Adventure The Memoirs Of Herbert Hoover The Cabinet and the Presidency, 1920 1933 The Memoirs Of Herbert Hoover 1929 1941 the Great Depression The Ordeal of Woodrow Wilson Herbert Hoover On Growing Up His Letters from and to American Children Fishing for Fun And to Wash Your Soul Heritage and memorials Hoover Presidential Library A plaque in PoznaD honoring Herbert Hoover The Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum is located in West Branch, Iowa next to the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site. The library is one of thirteen presidential libraries run by the National Archives and Records Administration. The HooverMinthorn House, where Hoover lived from 1885 to 1891, is located in Newberg, Oregon. The Lou Henry and Herbert Hoover House, built in 1919 in Stanford, California, is now the official residence of the president of Stanford University, and a National Historic Landmark. Also located at Stanford is the Hoover Institution, a think tank and research institution started by Hoover. Hoovers rustic rural presidential retreat, Rapidan Camp in the Shenandoah National Park, Virginia, has been restored and opened to the public. The Hoover Dam is named in his honor, as are numerous elementary, middle, and high schools across the United States. On December 10, 2008, Hoovers greatgranddaughter Margaret Hoover and Senate of Puerto Rico President Kenneth McClintock unveiled a lifesized bronze statue of Hoover at Puerto Ricos Territorial Capitol. The statue is one of seven honoring Presidents who have visited the United States territory during their term of office. One line in the All in the Family theme song an ironic exercise in pre New Deal nostalgia says Mister, we could use a man like Herbert Hoover again. The Belgian city of Leuven named a square in the city center after Hoover, honoring him for his work as chairman of the Commission for Relief in Belgium during World War I. The square is near the Central Library of the Catholic University of Leuven, where a bust of the president can be seen. The Polish capital of Warsaw also has a square named after Hoover alongside the Royal Route leading to the Old Town. George Burroughs Torrey painted a portrait of him. The historic townsite of Gwalia, Western Australia contains the Sons of Gwalia Museum and the Hoover House Bed and Breakfast, the renovated and restored Mining Engineers residence that was the original residence of Herbert Hoover and where he stayed in subsequent visits to the mine during the first decade of the twentieth century.Gwalia House. Gwalia.org.au. Retrieved on July 14, 2013. Media Brief synopsis of the Hoover Administration See also Hoover Minthorn House U.S. Presidents on U.S. postage stamps List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience Notes Works cited Further reading Biographies Scholarly studies Primary sources Myers, William Starr Walter H. Newton, eds. The Hoover Administration a documented narrative . 1936. Hawley, Ellis, ed. Herbert Hoover Containing the Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President , 4 vols. . . . . . . . . . The Crusade Years, 1933 1955 Herbert Hoovers Lost Memoir of the New Deal Era and Its Aftermath ed. by George Nash. details American Engineering Council, Committee on Elimination of Waste in Industry Waste in Industry Federated American Engineering Societies, 1921 External links White House biography Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum Herbert Hoover National Historic Site, National Park Service CategoryHerbert Hoover Category1874 births Category1964 deaths Category19thcentury American people Category19thcentury Quakers Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury Quakers CategoryAmerican mining engineers CategoryAmerican anticommunists CategoryAmerican expatriates in Australia CategoryAmerican expatriates in China CategoryAmerican geologists CategoryAmerican humanitarians CategoryAmerican memoirists CategoryAmerican nonfiction outdoors writers CategoryAmerican male writers CategoryAmerican people of Canadian descent CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of German descent CategoryAmerican people of Irish descent CategoryAmerican people of Swiss descent CategoryAmerican political writers CategoryAmerican Quakers CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryBelgian relief in World War I CategoryBurials in Iowa CategoryCalifornia Republicans CategoryCoolidge administration cabinet members CategoryConservatism in the United States CategoryDeaths from colorectal cancer CategoryDudley Winthrop family CategoryEngineers from California CategoryEngineers from Iowa CategoryEngineers from New York CategoryGeorge Fox University alumni CategoryHarding administration cabinet members CategoryHoover family CategoryIowa Republicans CategoryJohn Fritz Medal recipients CategoryNational Academy of Sciences laureates CategoryNew York Republicans CategoryPeople from Stanford, California CategoryPeople from West Branch, Iowa CategoryPeople from Newberg, Oregon CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryStanford University alumni CategoryStanford University trustees CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1920 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1928 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1932 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1936 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1940 CategoryUnited States Secretaries of Commerce CategoryWriters from California CategoryWriters from Iowa CategoryWriters from New YorkCity
John Quincy Adams was an American statesman who served as a diplomat, United States Senator, member of the House of Representatives, and the sixth President of the United States from 1825 to 1829. He was a member of the Federalist, DemocraticRepublican, National Republican, and later the AntiMasonic and Whig parties. He was the son of President John Adams and Abigail Adams and thus contributed to the formation of the Adams political family. Adams shaped U.S. foreign policy using his ardently nationalist commitment to U.S. republican values. As a diplomat, Adams played an important role in negotiating key treaties, most notably the Treaty of Ghent, which ended the War of 1812. As Secretary of State, he negotiated with Britain over the United States northern border with Canada, negotiated with Spain the annexation of Florida, and drafted the Monroe Doctrine. Historians generally concur that he was one of the greatest diplomats and secretaries of state in American history. In his biography, Samuel Flagg Bemis argues that Adams was able to gather together, formulate, and practice the fundamentals of American foreignpolicy selfdetermination, independence, noncolonization, nonintervention, nonentanglement in European politics, Freedom of the Seas, and freedom of commerce.. Adams was elected president in a close and controversial fourway contest in 1824. As president he sought to modernize the American economy and promote education. Adams enacted a part of his agenda and paid off much of the national debt. However, he was stymied time and again by a Congress controlled by opponents, and his lack of patronage networks helped politicians sabotage him. He lost his 1828 bid for reelection to Andrew Jackson. He has been portrayed by recent historians as an exemplar and moral leader during an era of modernization, when new modes of communication spread messages of religious revival, social reform, and party politics, and improved transportation moved goods, money, and people more rapidly. Historians have in the aggregate of surveys from 1948 to 2017, ranked Adams as the 21st most successful president. After leaving office, he was elected as U.S. Representative from Massachusetts in 1830, serving for the last 17 years of his life with greater acclaim than he had achieved as president. Animated by his growing revulsion against slavery, Adams became a leading opponent of the Slave Power. Adams predicted the Unions dissolution over slavery, and in such a case, felt the president could abolish slavery by using his war powers.. Adams also became a critic of the annexation of Texas and the MexicanAmerican War, which he saw as an aggressive war for territory. Early life, education, and early career Coat of Arms of John Quincy Adams John Quincy Adams was born on July 11, 1767, to John Adams and his wife Abigail in a part of Braintree, Massachusetts that is now Quincy. He was named for his mothers maternal grandfather, Colonel John Quincy, after whom Quincy, Massachusetts, is named. Young Adams was educated by private tutors his cousin James Thaxter and his fathers law clerk, Nathan Rice. He soon began to exhibit his literary skills in 1779, when he initiated a diary which he kept until just before he died in 1848. The diary comprised an unprecedented fifty volumes, representing one of the most extensive and widely cited collections of firsthand information about the early republic. Much of Adams youth was spent accompanying his father overseas. He accompanied his father on diplomatic missions to France from 1778 until 1779 and to the Netherlands from 1780 until 1782. Adams acquired an education at institutions such as Leiden University. He matriculated in Leiden on January 10, 1781.Album Studiosorum Academiae Lugduno Batavae MDLXXV MDCCCLXXV, kol. 1136. For nearly three years, beginning at the age of 14, he accompanied Francis Dana as a secretary on a mission to Saint Petersburg, Russia, to obtain recognition of the new United States. He spent time in Finland, Sweden, and Denmark and, in 1804, published a travel report on Silesia. During these years overseas, Adams became fluent in French and Dutch and became familiar with German and other European languages. Though Adams enjoyed Europe, he and his family decided he needed to return to the United States to complete his education and eventually launch a political career.. He entered Harvard College, graduated in 1787 with a Bachelor of Arts degree, and was elected by Phi Beta Kappa. Adams, mainly with the influence of his father, had excelled in classical studies and reached fluency in Latin and Greek. Upon entering Harvard he had already translated Virgil, Horace, Plutarch, and Aristotle and within six months memorized his Greek grammar and translated the New Testament.. After graduating from Harvard, he studied law with Theophilus Parsons in Newburyport, Massachusetts from 1787 to 1789. He earned a Master of Arts from Harvard in 1790, was admitted to the Massachusetts bar in 1791, and began practicing law in Boston. Early political career Washington and Adams, Sr. administrations John Quincy Adams, age 29 Adams initially won national recognition when he published a series of articles supporting Washingtons decision to keep America out of the growing hostilities surrounding the French Revolution. Soon after, George Washington appointed Adams, age 26, minister to the Netherlands in 1793. He preferred his quiet life of reading in Massachusetts, but yielded to his fathers persuasion to take it. On his way to the Netherlands, he delivered a set of documents to John Jay, who was negotiating the Jay Treaty after spending some time with Jay, Adams wrote home to his father, in support of the emerging treaty, because he thought America should stay out of European affairs. Historian Paul Nagel has noted that this letter ultimately reached Washington, and that parts of it were used by Washington when drafting his farewell address. While going back and forth between The Hague and London, he met and proposed to his future wife, Louisa Catherine Johnson. Though he wanted to return to private life at the end of his appointment, Washington named him minister to Portugal in 1796, where he was soon assigned to the Berlin Legation. Though his talents were far greater than his desire to serve, he was finally convinced to remain in public service when he learned how highly Washington regarded his abilities. Gilbert Stuart Portrait of Louisa Adams Washington called Adams the most valuable of Americas officials abroad, and Nagel believes that it was at this time that Adams came to terms with a future of public service. While abroad, Adams continued to urge neutrality, arguing that the United States would benefit economically by staying out of the ongoing French Revolutionary Wars.. He became a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1797. When the elder Adams became president, he appointed his son in 1797 as Minister to Prussia at Washingtons urging.. There Adams signed the renewal of the very liberal PrussianAmerican Treaty of Amity and Commerce after negotiations with Prussian Foreign Minister Count KarlWilhelm Finck von Finckenstein. He served at that post until 1801, when Thomas Jefferson took office as president.. While serving abroad, in 1797 Adams also married Louisa Catherine Johnson, the daughter of a poor American merchant, in a ceremony at the church of All HallowsbytheTower, London. Adams is the first president to marry a first lady born outside of the United States, and this did not recur until President Donald Trump assumed office in 2017, with Melania Trump as first lady. Massachusetts politics On his return to the United States, Adams was appointed a Commissioner of Monetary Affairs in Boston by a Federal District Judge, but this was rescinded by Thomas Jefferson. He again tried his hand as an attorney, but soon entered politics he was elected a member of the Massachusetts State Senate in April 1802. In November of that same year he ran unsuccessfully as a Federalist for the United States House of Representatives.. The Massachusetts state legislature, then referred to as the Massachusetts General Court, in 1803 elected Adams as a Federalist to the U.S. Senate, where he served until 1808, at which time he broke with the Federalist Party. Adams as a senator had supported the Louisiana Purchase and Jeffersons Embargo Act, which made him very unpopular with that party. The Federalistcontrolled Massachusetts Legislature chose a replacement for Adams on June 3, 1808, several months early. On June 8, Adams renounced his membership in the party, resigned his Senate seat, and became a Republican. Harvard professor While a member of the Senate, Adams also served as a professor of logic at Brown University.. Disowned by the Federalists and not fully accepted by the Republicans, he then accepted the Boylston Professorship of Rhetoric and Oratory at Harvard, and used this as a platform he assumed this position in 1805 after declining the presidency of Harvard. Adams devotion to classical rhetoric shaped his response to public issues. He remained inspired by those rhetorical ideals long after the neoclassicalism and deferential politics of the founding generation were eclipsed by the commercial ethos and mass democracy of the Jacksonian Era. Many of Adams idiosyncratic positions were rooted in his abiding devotion to the Ciceronian ideal of the citizenorator speaking well to promote the welfare of the polis. He was also influenced by the classical republican ideal of civic eloquence espoused by British philosopher David Hume. Adams adapted these classical republican ideals of public oratory to the American debate, viewing its multilevel political structure as ripe for the renaissance of Demosthenic eloquence. His Lectures on Rhetoric and Oratory looks at the fate of ancient oratory, the necessity of liberty for it to flourish, and its importance as a unifying element for a new nation of diverse cultures and beliefs. Just as civic eloquence failed to gain popularity in Britain, in the United States interest faded in the second decade of the 19th century as the public spheres of heated oratory disappeared in favor of the private sphere. First U.S. minister to Russia President James Madison appointed Adams as the first United States Minister to Russia in 1809. Though Adams had only recently broken with the Federalist Party, his support of Jeffersons foreign policy had earned him goodwill with the Madison Administration.. After resigning his post at Harvard, Adams and his wife Louisa boarded a merchant ship in Boston on Aug. 5, 1809. Their youngest son was with them during the long and tedious voyage to St. Petersburg which was temporarily interrupted outside the southern coast of Norway due to the Gunboat War. They were at first boarded by a British officer who examined their papers and then, later that day, by a Norwegian officer who ordered the ship to Christiansand. In Christiansand, Adams discovered thirtyeight U.S. vessels had been detained by the Norwegians and determined to gain the release of both ships and crew as soon as possible. The voyage to St. Petersburg resumed but was once again stopped by a British squadron. Adams showed his commission to Admiral Albermarle Bertie, the commander of the Squadron who recognized Adams as an ambassador. Because of the many delays, the Adamses did not arrive in St. Petersburg until October 23, 1809. Count Nikolay Rumyantsev, Chancellor of the empire, formally received Adams, and requested a copy of his credential letter. Romanzoff assured Adams that his appointment pleased him personally. Adams presentation to the emperor was postponed, however, because of the temporary indisposition of Alexander I. Rumyantsev immediately invited Adams to a diplomatic dinner which included the French ambassador, Armand Augustin Louis de Caulaincourt, Duke of Vicenza, numerous foreign ministers then at the Russian Court, and many of the nobility. This was the same mansion where Adams had dined in 1781, as secretary of Francis Dana. Tsar Alexander I received Adams alone in his cabinet where he expressed his pleasure at Adams appointment. Adams told Alexander that the president of the United States had desired him to express the hope that his mission would be considered as a proof of respect for the person and character of his majesty, as an acknowledgment of the many testimonies of goodwill he had already given to the United States, and of a desire to strengthen commercial relations between them and his provinces. Alexander replied, that, in everything depending on him, he should be happy to contribute to the increase of their friendly relations that it was his wish to establish a just system of maritime rights, and that he should adhere invariably to those he had declared. After these official diplomatic greetings, Alexander and Adams discussed several other issues such as the policies of the different European powers, trade and commerce, and other mutually beneficial prospects, and that Russia and U.S. could be very useful to each other. Adams urged Rumyantsev to ask Alexander to act on behalf of the United States in securing the release of the American sailors and ships being held by the Danish. The Tsar ordered the Chancellor to request the release of the American property as soon as possible, which the Danish government complied with. Adams spent a great deal of time securing the release of American vessels and seamen from various seizures and sequestrations. In 1811, Adams received a commission from the Secretary of State to serve as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States he promptly declined and remained in St. Petersburg. In 1812, Adams witnessed and reported the news of Napoleons invasion of Russia and the latters disastrous retreat. Also in 1812, Rumyantsev asked if he should request Alexander to mediate a pacification of hostilities between the United States and Great Britain. The U.S. accepted the offer and in July 1813, two associates of Adams, Albert Gallatin and James A. Bayard arrived in St. Petersburg to begin negotiations under mediation by Alexander. Gallatin was at that time Secretary of Treasury and the Senate rejected his appointment to the diplomatic mission as unconstitutional. However, this rejection did not occur until after Gallatin and Bayard had left for St. Petersburg. In September, Lord William Cathcart delivered a British message to Alexander explaining their reasons for declining the mediation. Thus ended President Madisons hope that Alexander could end the war.. 1815 US passport issued by John Quincy Adams at London Louisa Adams served an invaluable role as wifeofdiplomat, becoming a favorite of the czar and making up for her husbands utter lack of charm. However, Adams was personally well liked by the Russian Court and often would be met on walks by Alexander. The Tsar asked Adams if he would be taking a house in the country over the summer. When Adams hesitated, the emperor stated with good humor that perhaps it was a financial consideration and Adams was able to respond in kind that it indeed was in large part. Adams was a man who endeavored to live within the means provided by the American government. Minister to the Court of St. Jamess In 1814, Adams was recalled from Russia to serve as chief negotiator of the U.S. commission for the Treaty of Ghent, which ended the War of 1812 between the United States and United Kingdom. The United Kingdoms first peace offer in mid1814 was unacceptable to the American delegation, as it included unfavorable terms such as the creation of an Indian barrier state out of parts of the northwestern United States. By November 1814, the government of Lord Liverpool decided to seek an end to hostilities with the U.S. on the basis of status quo ante bellum . Adams and his fellow commissioners had hoped for similar terms, though a return to the status quo would mean the continuation of British practice of impressment, which had been a major cause of the war. The treaty was signed on December 24, 1814. The United States did not gain any concessions from the treaty, but could boast that it had survived a war against the strongest power in the world. Following the signing of the treaty, Adams traveled to Paris, where he witnessed firsthand the Hundred Days of Napoleons restoration. During this period, Adams learned that President Madison had appointed him as the minister to the Court of St. Jamess . Adams arrived in Britain in May 1815. In London, Adams was part of a U.S. Legation consisting of himself, two young secretaries and a small office in Craven Street, near Charing Cross. Since they were not particularly well paid, Adams and his wife Louisa lived in Ealing, at that time a village in the countryside, in order to maintain the expensive carriages and liveries which social appearance demanded. With the aid of Henry Clay and Albert Gallatin, who had also been part of the U.S. commission at Ghent, Adams negotiated a limited trade agreement with Britain. Following the conclusion of the trade agreement, much of Adamss time as ambassador was spent helping stranded American sailors and prisoners of war. In April 1817, Adams received a letter from newly inaugurated President James Monroe, who offered Adams the role of Secretary of State. Having spent several years in Europe, Adams finally returned to the United States in August 1817. U.S. Secretary of State Adams portrait Gilbert Stuart, 1818 In pursuit of national unity, President Monroe decided a Northerner would be optimal for the position of Secretary of State, and he chose the respected and experienced Adams for the role.. Adams served as Secretary of State throughout Monroes eightyear presidency, from 1817 to 1825. Taking office in the aftermath of the War of 1812, Adams thought that the country had been fortunate in avoiding territorial losses, and he prioritized avoiding another war with a European power, particularly Britain.. One of the major challenges confronting Adams was how to respond to the power vacuum in Latin America arising from Spains weakness following the Peninsular War.. Monroe and Adams agreed on most of the major foreign policy issues both favored neutrality towards the Latin American wars of independence, peace with Great Britain, denial of a trade agreement with the French, and expansion, peacefully if possible, into the North American territories of the Spanish Empire.. Adams had begun negotiations with Britain during his time as ambassador over several contentious issues that had not been solved by the War of 1812 or the Treaty of Ghent. In 1817, the two countries agreed to the Rush Bagot Treaty, which limited naval armaments on the Great Lakes. Negotiations between the two powers continued, resulting in the Treaty of 1818, which defined the Canada United States border west of the Great Lakes. The boundary was set at the 49th parallel to the Rocky Mountains, while the territory to the west of the mountains would be jointly occupied. The agreement represented a turning point in United Kingdom United States relations, as the U.S. turned its attention to its southern and western borders and British fears over American expansionism waned.. In the Adams Ons Treaty, the United States acquired Florida and set the western border of the 1803 Louisiana Purchase When Adams took office, Spanish possessions bordered the United States to the South and West. In the South, Spain retained control of Florida, which the U.S. had long sought to purchase. Spain struggled to control the Native American tribes active in Florida, some of which raided U.S. territory. In the West, New Spain bordered the territory purchased by the U.S. in the Louisiana Purchase, but no clear boundary had been established between U.S. and Spanish territory. After taking office, Adams began negotiations with Luis de Ons, the Spanish minister to the United States, for the purchase of Florida and the settlement of a border between the U.S. and New Spain. Adams hoped to set the U.S. border at the Rio Grande River, while the Spanish preferred that the border be set at the Mississippi River. The negotiations were interrupted by an escalation of the Seminole War, and in December 1818 Monroe ordered General Andrew Jackson to enter Florida and retaliate against Seminoles that had raided Georgia. Exceeding his orders, Jackson defeated the Seminoles, but also captured the Spanish outposts of St. Marks and Pensacola and executed two Englishmen. While the rest of the cabinet was outraged by Jacksons actions, Adams defended them as necessary to selfdefense and protected by international law, and Adams eventually convinced Monroe and most of the cabinet to support Jackson. After extended negotiations, the two powers agreed to the Adams Ons Treaty, in which Spain transferred Florida to the U.S. and the Sabine River was established as the western border of the United States. The treaty was ratified in February 1821.. As the Spanish Empire continued to fracture during Monroes second term, Adams and Monroe became increasingly concerned that the Holy Alliance would seek to bring Spains erstwhile colonies under control. In 1822, following the conclusion of the Adams Ons Treaty, the Monroe administration recognized the independence of several Latin American countries, including Argentina and Mexico. In 1823, British Foreign Secretary George Canning suggested that the U.S. and Britain should work together to preserve the independence of these fledgling republics. The cabinet debated whether or not to accept the offer, but Adams opposed it. Instead, Adams urged Monroe to publicly declare U.S. opposition to any European attempt to colonize or retake control of territory in the Americas, while also committing the U.S. to neutrality with respect to European affairs. Adams wrote a draft for Monroe that stated these principles and also proclaimed U.S. support for republican principles. In his December 1823 annual message to Congress, Monroe laid out the Monroe Doctrine, which was largely built upon Adamss ideas. The doctrine became one of the foundational principles of U.S. foreign policy.. 1824 presidential election 1824 presidential election results Immediately upon becoming Secretary of State, Adams emerged as one of Monroes most likely successors, as the last three presidents had all served in the role before taking office. As the 1824 election approached, Adams, Clay, Secretary of War John C. Calhoun, and Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford positioned themselves to succeed Monroe. Adams felt that his own election as president would vindicate his father, while also allowing him to pursue an ambitious domestic policy. Though he lacked the charisma of his competitors, Adams was widely respected and benefited from the lack of other prominent Northerners.. The Federalist Party had nearly collapsed in the aftermath of the War of 1812, and all of the major presidential candidates were members of Monroes DemocraticRepublican Party. As 1824 approached, Jackson jumped into the race, motivated in large part by his anger over Clay and Crawfords denunciations of his actions in Florida.. The congressional nominating caucus had decided upon previous presidential nominees, but it had become largely discredited. Candidates were instead nominated by state legislatures or nominating conventions, and Adams received the endorsement of several New England legislatures.. Seeing Jacksons strength, Calhoun dropped out of the presidential race and instead sought the vice presidency. The remaining candidates relied heavily on regional strength. Adams was popular in New England, Clay and Jackson were strong in the West, and Jackson and Crawford competed for the South, despite the latters health problems. In the 1824 presidential election, no candidate won a majority of the electoral vote, necessitating a contingent election under the terms of the Twelfth Amendment. The House decided among the top three electoral vote winners, with each states delegation having one vote. The top three electoral vote winners were Jackson, Adams, and Crawford though Clay had also received electoral votes, he was not eligible to be selected by the House.. 400x400px Adams knew that his own victory in the contingent election would require the support of Clay, who besides being a presidential contender also had accumulated immense influence in the House and had thrice served as the bodys speaker. In contrast with Clay, Crawford believed in a weak, limited federal government. Jacksons policy views were unclear, but Clay had been outraged by Jacksons actions in Florida, and he feared what Jackson would do in office. Clays American System called for high tariffs, federallyfunded internal improvements, and a national bank, all of which were supported by Adams. Adams and Clay met prior to the contingent election, and Clay agreed to support Adams. In February 1825 Adams won the contingent election, taking thirteen of the twentyfour state delegations. After the election, many of Jacksons supporters claimed that Adams and Clay had reached a Corrupt Bargain in which Adams promised Clay the position of Secretary of State in return for Clays support.. Presidency John Quincy Adams, George Peter Alexander Healy, 1858 Inauguration Adams was inaugurated on March 4, 1825. He took the oath of office on a book of constitutional law, instead of the more traditional Bible. In his inaugural address, adopted a postpartisan tone, promising that he would avoid partybuilding and politicallymotivated appointments. He also proposed an elaborate program of internal improvements roads, ports, and canals. Though some worried about the constitutionality of such federal projects, Adams argued that the General Welfare Clause provided for broad constitutional authority. While his predecessors had engaged in projects like the building of the National Road, Adams promised that he would ask Congress to authorize many more such projects.. Appointments Administration and cabinet Judiciary Adams appointed one Justice to the Supreme Court of the United States and eleven judges to the United States district courts. The lone Supreme Court Justice, Robert Trimble, served from May 1826 to his death in August 1828. Adams nominated John J. Crittenden to replace Trimble, but the Senate never voted on Crittendens nomination. Domestic policies In his 1825 annual message to Congress, Adams presented a comprehensive and ambitious agenda. He called for major investments in internal improvements as well as the creation of a national university, a naval academy, and a national astronomical observatory. Noting the healthy status of the treasury and the possibility for more revenue via land sales, Adams argued for the completion of several projects that were in various stages of construction or planning, including a road from Washington to New Orleans.. However, Adamss programs faced opposition from various quarters. Many disagreed with his broad interpretation of the constitution, and favored stronger state governments at the expense of the federal government. Others disliked any government interference and were opposed to central planning.. Some in the South feared that Adams was secretly an abolitionist and that he sought to suborn the states to the federal government.. Some of his proposals were adopted, specifically the extension of the Cumberland Road into Ohio with surveys for its continuation west to St. Louis the beginning of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, the construction of the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal and the Louisville and Portland Canal around the falls of the Ohio the connection of the Great Lakes to the Ohio River system in Ohio and Indiana and the enlargement and rebuilding of the Dismal Swamp Canal in North Carolina. One of the issues which divided the administration was protective tariffs, of which Henry Clay was a leading advocate. Allies of Adams lost control of Congress after the 1826 midterm elections, and proAdams Speaker of the House John Taylor was replaced by Andrew Stevenson, a Jackson supporter.. Jacksonian Congressmen lobbied numerous attacks against Adams, including attacks on Adamss actions at Ghent and criticism of White House expenditures such as the purchase of a pool table.. Jacksonians devised the Tariff of 1828, which raised tariffs considerably. After signing the tariff, Adams was denounced in the South, but received little credit for the tariff in the North.. Adams sought the gradual assimilation of Native Americans via consensual agreements, a priority shared by few whites in the 1820s. Yet Adams was also deeply committed to the westward expansion of the United States. Settlers on the frontier, who were constantly seeking to move westward, cried for a more expansionist policy that disregarded the concerns of a supposedly inferior civilization. Early in his term, Adams suspended the Treaty of Indian Springs after learning that the Governor of Georgia, George Troup, had forced the treaty on the Muscogee. Adams signed a new treaty with the Muskogee in January 1826 that allowed the Muskogee to stay but ceded most of their land to Georgia. Troup refused to accept its terms, and authorized all Georgian citizens to evict the Muskogee. A third treaty was signed in 1828, giving all of the Muskogee land to Georgia.. Foreign policies According to Charles Edel, Adams believed that, Intervention would accomplish little, retard the cause of republicanism, and distract the country from its primary goal of continental expansion. Moreover, fearful that U.S. intentions would outstrip its capabilities, Adams thought that projecting U.S. power abroad would weaken its gravitational force on the North American continent. During his term as president, Adams achieved little of longterm consequence in foreign affairs. A reason for this was the opposition he faced in Congress, where his rivals prevented him from succeeding. Bemis , 1956 Among his diplomatic achievements were treaties of reciprocity with a number of nations, including Denmark, Mexico, the Hanseatic League, the Scandinavian countries, Prussia, and Austria. However, thanks to the successes of Adams diplomacy during his previous eight years as secretary of state, most of the foreign policy issues he would have faced had been resolved by the time he became president.Hargreaves, The Presidency of John Quincy Adams ch 4 As president, Adams continued to pursue the peaceful settlement of potential disputes with Britain, including the unsettled border between Maine and Canada. However, in 1825, Britain banned U.S. trade from the British West Indies, damaging Adamss prestige in foreign affairs.. After Congress retaliated by increasing tariffs on British products, the British forbid U.S. trade with any British colony aside from Canada, further damaging U.S. businesses.. Adams favored sending a U.S. delegation to the Congress of Panama, an 1826 conference of New World republics organized by Simn Bolvar. Adams sought closer ties with the new Latin American states, believing that stability among the new states would benefit the U.S. and be conducive for the purchase of Texas from Mexico.. However, the funding for a delegation and the confirmation of delegation nominees became entangled in a political battle over Adamss domestic policies, with opponents such as Senator Martin Van Buren impeding the process of confirming a delegation. Though the delegation finally won confirmation from the Senate, it never reached the Congress of Panama due to congressional resistance and delay.. 1828 presidential election 1828 presidential election results During his presidency, Adamss opponents coalesced around Jackson. Opponents accused Adams of favoring big government, the Northeast, manufacturing, and abolition. Followers of Jackson, Van Buren, and Calhoun formed a protoparty apparatus, raising large sums of money and sponsoring newspapers and local clubs.. Adams, meanwhile, refused to adapt to the new reality of political campaigns, and he avoided public functions and refused to invest in proadministration tools such as newspapers.. As the presidential election of 1828 approached, Jackson was viewed as the favorite by many, as Van Buren and others had established a strong base of support. In the spring of 1827, Jackson was publicly accused of having encouraged his wife to desert her first husband.. In response, followers of Jackson attacked Adamss personal life, and the campaign turned increasingly nasty.. Though few doubted Adamss intelligence, the Jacksonian press portrayed him as an outoftouch elitist.. Vice President Calhoun joined Jacksons ticket, while Adams turned to Secretary of the Treasury Richard Rush as his running mate. This represented the first time in U.S. history that a ticket of two Northerners faced at ticket of two Southerners.. Neither side publicly campaigned on the issue of slavery, but Adamss status as a New Englander may have hurt him, as many outside of New England held negative cultural stereotypes about the region.. The key states in the election were New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio, which accounted for nearly a third of the countrys electoral votes.. Jackson won Pennsylvania, Ohio, and even Clays home state of Kentucky. He also won a majority of the electoral votes in New York, and denied Adams a sweep of New England by winning an electoral vote in Maine. In the South, aside from Adamss win in Maryland, only Louisiana was remotely competitive, and even there Jackson won 53 of the vote. In total, Jackson won 178 of the 261 electoral votes and just under 56 percent of the popular vote. No future presidential candidate would match Jacksons proportion of the popular vote until Theodore Roosevelt exceeded it in 1904. Adamss loss made him the second oneterm president, after his own father. The election marked the permanent end of the Era of Good Feelings and the start of the Second Party System.. Departure John Quincy Adams left office on March 4, 1829. Adams did not attend the inauguration of his successor, Andrew Jackson, who had openly snubbed him by refusing to pay the traditional courtesy call to the outgoing president during the weeks before his own inauguration. Jacksons wife had died shortly after the election, and Jackson blamed Adams and his followers for her death.. Adams was one of only four presidents who chose not to attend their respective successors inauguration the others were his father, Andrew Johnson, and Richard Nixon. Later congressional career Adams considered permanently retiring from public life after his 1828 defeat, and he was deeply hurt by the suicide of his son, George Washington Adams, in 1829.. He was appalled by many of the Jackson administrations actions, including its embrace of the spoils system.. Adams grew bored of his retirement and still felt that his career was unfinished, so he ran for and won a seat in the United States House of Representatives in the 1830 elections.. His election went against the generally held opinion, shared by his own wife and youngest son, that former presidents should not run for public office.. He was the first president to serve in Congress after his term of office, and one of only two former presidents to do so . He was elected to nine terms, serving as a Representative for 17 years, from 1831 until his death. Returning to Washington at the age of sixtyfour, Adams expected a light workload, but Speaker Andrew Stevenson selected Adams chairman of the Committee on Commerce and Manufactures.. During his time in Congress he also served as chairman of the Committee on Indian Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Stevenson, an ally of Jackson, expected that the chairmanship would keep Adams busy defending the tariff, but that the presence of a Jacksonian majority on the committee would prevent Adams from accruing any real power.. Adams ran for Governor of Massachusetts in 1833 on the AntiMasonic ticket. Incumbent National Republican Governor Levi Lincoln, Jr. was retiring so Adams faced that partys John Davis, Democrat Marcus Morton and Samuel L. Allen of the Working Mens Party. Davis won a plurality with 40 Adams took 29, with Morton taking 25 and Allen 6. Because no candidate had won a majority, the election was decided by the state legislature. Adams withdrew and endorsed Davis, preferring him over Morton, and Davis was chosen in January 1834. When James Smithson died and left his estate to the U.S. government to build an institution of learning, many in Congress wanted to use the money for other purposes. Adams played a key role ensuring that the money was instead used to build the Smithsonian Institution. In 1839, he was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society. Adams opposed the annexation of Texas, viewing as unconstitutional the imposition of U.S. citizenship on foreign nationals when those nationals did not hold a referendum.. Adams called for the annexation of the entirety of Oregon Country, a disputed region occupied by both the United States and Britain, and was disappointed when President James K. Polk signed the Oregon Treaty, which divided the land between the two claimants at the 49th parallel.. Adams became a strong critic of the MexicanAmerican War, which he saw as a war of aggression against Mexico that was designed to take Mexican territory.. Although the war was popular at first, many Whigs eventually opposed it.. Although there is no indication that the two were close, Adams met Abraham Lincoln during the latters sole term as a member of the House of Representatives, from 1847 until Adams death. Thus, it has been suggested that Adams is the only major figure in American history who knew both the Founding Fathers and Abraham Lincoln however, this is not so, as Martin Van Buren met Founding Fathers Thomas Jefferson and John Adams, knew Founder Aaron Burr , and met the young Lincoln while on a campaign trip through Illinois. Slavery John Quincy Adams during his final hours of life after his collapse in the Capitol. Drawing in pencil by Arthur Joseph Stansbury, digitally restored. A longtime opponent of slavery, Adams used his new role in Congress to fight it, and he became the most prominent national leader opposing slavery. Parsons, Adams, p. 224 In 1836, Southern Representatives voted in a gag rule that immediately tabled any petitions about slavery, thus preventing any discussion or debate of the slavery issue. He became a forceful opponent of this rule and conceived a way around it, attacking slavery in the House for two weeks. The gag rule prevented him from bringing slavery petitions to the floor, but he brought one anyway. It was a petition from a Georgia citizen urging disunion due to the continuation of slavery in the South. Though he certainly did not support it and made that clear at the time, his intent was to antagonize the proslavery faction of Congress into an open fight on the matter. The plan worked. The petition infuriated his Congressional enemies, many of whom were agitating for disunion themselves. They moved for his censure over the matter, enabling Adams to discuss slavery openly during his subsequent defense. Taking advantage of his right to defend himself, Adams delivered prepared and impromptu remarks against slavery and in favor of abolition. Knowing that he would probably be acquitted, he changed the focus from his own actions to those of the slaveholders, speaking against the slave trade and the ownership of slaves. He decided that if he were censured, he would merely resign, run for the office again, and probably win easily. When his opponents realized that they played into his political strategy, they tried to bury the censure. Adams made sure this did not happen, and the debate continued. He attacked slavery and slaveholders as immoral, and condemned the institution while calling for it to end. After two weeks, a vote was held, and he was not censured. He delighted in the misery he was inflicting on the slaveholders he so hated, and prided himself on being obnoxious to the slave faction. Although the censure of Adams over the slavery petition was ultimately abandoned, the House did address the issue of petitions from enslaved persons at a later time. Adams again argued that the right to petition was a universal right, granted by God, so that those in the weakest positions might always have recourse to those in the most powerful. Adams also called into question the actions of a House that would limit its own ability to debate and resolve questions internally. After this debate, the gag rule was ultimately retained. The discussion ignited by his actions and the attempts of others to quiet him raised questions of the right to petition, the right to legislative debate, and the morality of slavery. During the censure debate, Adams said that he took delight in the thought that southerners would forever remember him as the acutest, the astutest, the archest enemy of southern slavery that ever existed. In 1844, he chaired a committee for reform of the rules of Congress, and he used this opportunity to try once again to repeal the gag rule. He spent two months building support for this move, but due to northern opposition, the rule narrowly survived. He fiercely criticized northern Representatives and Senators, in particular Stephen A. Douglas, who seemed to cater to the slave faction in exchange for southern support. His opposition to slavery made him, along with Henry Clay, one of the leading opponents of Texas annexation and the Mexican American War. He correctly predicted that both would contribute to civil war. After one of his reelection victories, he said that he must bring about a day prophesied when slavery and war shall be banished from the face of the earth. He wrote in his private journal in 1820. In 1841, at the request of Lewis Tappan and Ellis Gray Loring, Adams joined the case of United States v. The Amistad . Adams went before the Supreme Court on behalf of African slaves who had revolted and seized the Spanish ship Amistad . Adams appeared on 24 February 1841, and spoke for four hours. His argument succeeded the Court ruled in favor of the Africans, who were declared free and returned to their homes. Among his opponents was President Martin Van Buren. In the following years, the Spanish government continued to press the US for compensation for the ship and its cargo, including the slaves. Several southern lawmakers introduced Congressional resolutions to appropriate money for such payment, but none passed, despite support from Democratic presidents James K. Polk and James Buchanan. Adams continued to speak out against what he called the Slave Power, that is the organized political power of the slave owners who dominated all the southern states and their representation in Congress.Leonard L. Richards, The slave power the free North and southern domination, 1780 1860 p. 44 He vehemently attacked the annexation of Texas and the Mexican War as part of a conspiracy to extend slavery.Leonard L. Richards, The life and times of Congressman John Quincy Adams ch 6 Photography Sources contend that in 1843 Adams sat for the earliest confirmed photograph still in existence of a U.S. president, although others maintain that William Henry Harrison had posed even earlier for his portrait, in 1841. The original daguerreotype is in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution. Nullification crisis Shortly after Adams entered Congress, the Nullification Crisis threatened civil war over the Tariff of 1828. Clay and Adams offered an amendment moderating the tariff, and defused the crisis. Congress also passed the Force Bill which authorized President Andrew Jackson to use military force if Adams compromise bill did not force the belligerent states to capitulate. There was no need, however, because Adams compromise remedied the matter. The compromise actually did not alter the tariff as much as the southern states had hoped, though they agreed not to continue pursuing the issue for fear of civil war. Advancement of science Adams portrait at U.S. National Portrait Gallery by George Bingham c. 1850 Adams also became a leading force for the promotion of science. As president, he had proposed a national observatory, which did not win much support. In 1829 British scientist James Smithson died, and left his fortune for the increase and diffusion of knowledge. In Smithsons will, he stated that should his nephew, Henry James Hungerford, die without heirs, the Smithson estate would go to the government of the United States to create an Establishment for the increase diffusion of Knowledge among men. After the nephew died without heirs in 1835, President Andrew Jackson informed Congress of the bequest, which amounted to about US500,000 . Adams realized that this might allow the United States to realize his dream of building a national institution of science and learning. Adams thus became Congress primary supporter of the future Smithsonian Institution. The money was invested in shaky state bonds, which quickly defaulted. After heated debate in Congress, Adams successfully argued to restore the lost funds with interest.Smithsonian Information Brochure, Smithsonian Visitor Information and Associates Reception Center, May 2009 Though Congress wanted to use the money for other purposes, Adams successfully persuaded Congress to preserve the money for an institution of science and learning. Congress also debated whether the federal government had the authority to accept the gift, though with Adams leading the initiative, Congress decided to accept the legacy bequeathed to the nation and pledged the faith of the United States to the charitable trust on July 1, 1836. He also relentlessly pursued support for astronomical efforts and observatories, seeking a national observatory for the United States. In 1825 Adams signed a bill for the creation of a national observatory just before leaving presidential office. His efforts led to the founding in 1830 of what is now the oldest, stilloperational scientific institution of the United States, the United States Naval Observatory. Adams in fact spent many nights at the Observatory, with celebrated national astronomer and oceanographer Matthew Fontaine Maury, watching and charting the stars, which had always been one of Adams avocations. Death Adamss cenotaph at the Congressional Cemetery In 1846, the 78yearold former president suffered a stroke that left him partially paralyzed. After a few months of rest, he made a full recovery and resumed his duties in Congress. When Adams entered the House chamber, everyone stood up and applauded. On February 21, 1848, the House of Representatives was discussing the matter of honoring U.S. Army officers who served in the Mexican American War. Adams had been a vehement critic of the war, and as Congressmen rose up to say, Aye in favor of the measure, he instead yelled, No He rose to answer a question put forth by Speaker of the House Robert Charles Winthrop. Immediately thereafter, Adams collapsed, having suffered a massive cerebral hemorrhage. Two days later, on February 23, he died with his wife at his side in the Speakers Room inside the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C. his only living child, Charles Francis, did not arrive in time to see his father alive. His last words were This is the last of earth. I am content. He died at 720p.m. He was the last surviving child of John Adams. First term Representative Abraham Lincoln of Illinois was assigned to the committee making the funeral arrangements.Pohl, Robert S., Abraham Lincoln on Capitol Hill published in Abraham Lincoln and the End of Slavery in the District of Columbia , Eastern Branch Press, Washington, D.C. . . His original interment was temporary, in the public vault at the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C. Later, he was interred in the family burial ground in Quincy, Massachusetts, across from the First Parish Church, called Hancock Cemetery. After Louisas death in 1852, his son Charles Francis Adams had his parents reinterred in the expanded family crypt in the United First Parish Church across the street, next to John and Abigail. Both tombs are viewable by the public. Adams original tomb at Hancock Cemetery is still there and marked simply J.Q. Adams. John Quincy Adams original tomb at Hancock Cemetery, across the street from United First Parish Church Personal life Adams and Louisa had three sons and a daughter. Their daughter, Louisa, was born in 1811 but died in 1812 while the family was in Russia. They named their first son George Washington Adams after the first president. This decision upset Adamss mother, and, by her account, his father as well. Both George and their second son, John , led troubled lives and died in early adulthood.Shepherd, Jack, Cannibals of the Heart A Personal Biography of Louisa Catherine and John Quincy Adams , New York, McGrawHill 1980 George committed suicide and John was expelled from Harvard before his 1823 graduation. FileGeorge Washington Adams.jpgGeorge Washington Adams by Charles King FileJohn Adams II.jpgJohn Adams II FileCharles Francis Adams.jpgCharles Francis Adams Adams youngest son, Charles Francis Adams , pursued a career in diplomacy and politics. In 1870 Charles Francis built the first presidential library in the United States, to honor his father. The Stone Library includes over 14,000 books written in twelve languages. The library is located in the Old House at Adams National Historical Park in Quincy, Massachusetts. John Adams and John Quincy Adams were the only father and son to serve as presidents until George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush . It has been suggested that John Quincy Adams had the highest I.Q. of any U.S. president.Poindexter in Chief Presidential IQs and Success in the Oval Office U.S. News and World Report Presidential Greatness The Historical Consensus and Its Psychological Significance Dean Keith Simonton Political Psychology , Vol. 7, No. 2, 1986 Personality Presidential Dollar of John Quincy Adams Adams personality was much like that of his father, as were his political beliefs. He always preferred secluded reading to social engagements, and several times had to be pressured by others to remain in public service. Historian Paul Nagel states that, like Abraham Lincoln after him, Adams often suffered from depression, for which he sought some form of treatment in early years. Adams thought his depression was due to the high expectations demanded of him by his father and mother. Throughout his life he felt inadequate and socially awkward because of his depression, and was constantly bothered by his physical appearance. He was closer to his father, whom he spent much of his early life with abroad, than he was to his mother. When he was younger and the American Revolution was going on, his mother told her children what their father was doing, and what he was risking, and because of this Adams grew to greatly respect his father. His relationship with his mother was rocky she had high expectations of him and was afraid her children might end up dead alcoholics like her brother. His biographer, Nagel, concludes that his mothers disapproval of Louisa Johnson motivated him to marry Johnson in 1797, despite Adams reservations that Johnson, like his mother, had a strong personality. Legacy Tombs of Presidents John Adams and John Quincy Adams and their wives, in a family crypt beneath the United First Parish Church Though he later described his presidency as the unhappiest time of his life, scholars rate John Quincy Adams in the second quartile in the majority of historical presidential rankings. Historians have often included Adams among the leading conservatives of his day. Russell Kirk, however, sees Adams as a flawed conservative who was imprudent in opposing slavery. Adams foreign policy legacy, and its focus on noninterventionism, led to his name being adopted by the John Quincy Adams Society, a network of student groups that is committed to identifying, educating, and equipping the next generation of scholars and policy leaders to encourage a new era of realism and restraint in American foreign policy. John Quincy Adams Birthplace is now part of Adams National Historical Park and open to the public. Adams House, one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University, is named in honor of John Adams, John Quincy Adams, and other members of the Adams family who were associated with Harvard. The name Quincy has been used by several locations in the United States, including the town of Quincy, Illinois. Adams County, Illinois and Adams County, Indiana are also named after Adams. He was the first president to adopt a short haircut instead of long hair tied in a queue and to regularly wear long trousers instead of knee breeches. Film and television Adams occasionally is featured in the mass media. In the PBS miniseries The Adams Chronicles , he was portrayed by David Birney, William Daniels, Marcel Trenchard, Steven Grover and Mark Winkworth. He was also portrayed by Anthony Hopkins in the 1997 film Amistad , and again by Ebon MossBachrach and Steven Hinkle in the 2008 HBO television miniseries John Adams the HBO series received criticism for needless historical and temporal distortions in its portrayal. See also List of abolitionists List of United States political appointments across party lines List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience List of United States Congress members who died in office Mendi Bible List of descendants of Mayflower passengers Pronunciation note References Bibliography Fulltext in Swetswise, Ingenta and Ebsco. Cameron, Duncan Dick, Andrew Fitzmaurice, Paul others. An American President in Ealing The John Quincy Adams Diaries, 1815 1817. Publisher Little Ealing History Group. Fulltext in Project Muse. Adams role in antislavery petitions debate 1835 44. Heffron, Margery M. A Fine Romance The Courtship Correspondence between Louisa Catherine Johnson and John Quincy Adams, New England Quarterly, June 2010, Vol. 83 Issue 2, pp. 200 18 Holt, Michael F. The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party Jacksonian Politics and the Onset of the Civil War. 1999. Biography Lewis, James E. Jr. John Quincy Adams Policymaker for the Union. Scholarly Resources, 2001. 164 pp. fulltext online Melanson, James. Entangling Affiances with None John Quincy Adams, James K. Polk, and the Impact of Conflicting Interpretations, New England Journal of History, Fall 2009, Vol. 66 Issue 1, pp. 26 36, on Monroe Doctrine Shows that both men considered splitting the country as a solution. Morris, Walter John John Quincy Adams, Germanophile , Pennsylvania State University excerpt and text search Fulltext online at Jstor and Ebsco. He tried to create a national observatory, which became the U.S. Naval Observatory. Pessen, Edward. John Quincy Adams in Henry Graff, ed. The Presidents A Reference History online Fulltext online at Swetswise and Ebsco. Unger, Harlow Giles. John Quincy Adams , biography Waldstreicher, David, ed. A Companion to John Adams and John Quincy Adams excerpt and text search 600pp 25 essays by scholars Works Waldstreicher, David, ed. The Diaries of John Quincy Adams, 1779 1821 Library of America, 20170. xiv, 727 pp Founders Online, searchable edition External links White House biography The Diaries of John Quincy Adams A Digital Collection at the Massachusetts Historical Society Life Portrait of John Quincy Adams, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , April 18, 1999 Personal Manuscripts by John Quincy Adams at Shapell Category1767 births Category1848 deaths Category18thcentury American politicians Category18thcentury Unitarians Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury Unitarians CategoryAdams political family CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to Prussia CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to Russia CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to the Netherlands CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to the United Kingdom CategoryAmerican abolitionists CategoryAmerican expatriates in the Dutch Republic CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican Unitarians CategoryAntiMasonic Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Massachusetts CategoryBurials in Massachusetts CategoryChildren of Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryFederalist Party United States Senators CategoryFellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences CategoryGeorge Washington University trustee CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHarvard University alumni CategoryHarvard University faculty CategoryLeiden University alumni CategoryMassachusetts DemocraticRepublicans CategoryMassachusetts Federalists CategoryMassachusetts lawyers CategoryMassachusetts National Republicans CategoryMassachusetts State Senators CategoryMassachusetts Whigs CategoryMembers of the American Antiquarian Society CategoryMembers of the American Philosophical Society CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Massachusetts CategoryMonroe administration cabinet members CategoryNational Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryPhi Beta Kappa members CategoryPoliticians from Braintree, Massachusetts CategoryPoliticians from Quincy, Massachusetts CategoryPresidency of John Quincy Adams CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryQuincy family CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1820 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1824 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1828 CategoryUnited States Secretaries of State CategoryUnited States Senators from Massachusetts CategoryWhig Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by readinglaw
James Monroe was an American statesman who served as the fifth President of the United States from 1817 to 1825. Monroe was the last president among the Founding Fathers of the United States as well as the Virginian dynasty he also represented the end of the DemocraticRepublican Generation in that office. Born in Westmoreland County, Virginia, Monroe was of the planter class and fought in the American Revolutionary War. He was wounded in the Battle of Trenton with a musket ball to his shoulder. After studying law under Thomas Jefferson from 1780 to 1783, he served as a delegate in the Continental Congress. As an antifederalist delegate to the Virginia convention that considered ratification of the United States Constitution, Monroe opposed ratification, claiming it gave too much power to the central government. He took an active part in the new government, and in 1790 he was elected to the Senate of the first United States Congress, where he joined the DemocraticRepublicans. He gained experience as an executive as the Governor of Virginia and rose to national prominence as a diplomat in France, when he helped negotiate the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. During the War of 1812, Monroe served in critical roles as Secretary of State and the Secretary of War under President James Madison.. Facing little opposition from the fractured Federalist Party, Monroe was easily elected president in 1816, winning over 80 percent of the electoral vote and becoming the last president during the First Party System era of American politics. As president, he sought to ease partisan tensions, embarking on a tour of the country that was well received. With the ratification of the Treaty of 1818, under the successful diplomacy of his Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, the United States extended its reach from the Atlantic to the Pacific, by acquiring harbor and fishing rights in the Pacific Northwest the United States and Britain jointly occupied the Oregon Country. In addition to the acquisition of Florida, the 1819 Adams Ons Treaty secured the westernmost section of the southern border of the United States along the 42nd Parallel to the Pacific Ocean and represented Americas first determined attempt at creating an American global empire. As nationalism surged, partisan fury subsided, and the Era of Good Feelings ensued, until the Panic of 1819 struck, and a dispute over the admission of Missouri embroiled the country in 1820. Nonetheless, Monroe won nearunanimous reelection. Monroe supported the founding of colonies in Africa for freed slaves that would eventually form the nation of Liberia, whose capital, Monrovia, is named in his honor. In 1823, he announced the United States opposition to any European intervention in the recently independent countries of the Americas with the Monroe Doctrine, which became a landmark in American foreign policy. His presidency concluded the first period of American presidential history before the beginning of Jacksonian democracy and the Second Party System era. Following his retirement in 1825, Monroe was plagued by financial difficulties. He died in New York City on July 4, 1831. He has been ranked in the aggregate by scholars as the 16th most successful president. Early life Marker designating the site of James Monroes birthplace in Monroe Hall, Virginia James Monroe was born on April 28, 1758, in his parents house located in a wooded area of Westmoreland County, Virginia. The marked site is one mile from the unincorporated community known today as Monroe Hall, Virginia. The James Monroe Family Home Site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979. His father Spence Monroe was a moderately prosperous planter who also practiced carpentry. His mother Elizabeth Jones married Spence Monroe in 1752 and they had five children Elizabeth, James, Spence, Andrew, and Joseph Jones.. His paternal greatgrandfather Patrick Andrew Monroe emigrated to America from Scotland in the mid17th century. In 1650 he patented a large tract of land in Washington Parish, Westmoreland County, Virginia. Monroes mother was the daughter of a wealthy Welsh immigrant who had settled in nearby King George County, Virginia. Also among James Monroes ancestors were French Huguenot immigrants, who came to Virginia in 1700. At age eleven, Monroe was enrolled in the lone school in the county. Monroe attended this school for only eleven weeks a year, as his labor was needed on the farm. During this time, Monroe formed a lifelong friendship with an older classmate, John Marshall. Monroes mother died in 1772, and his father died two years later. Though he inherited property from both of his parents, the sixteenyearold Monroe was forced to withdraw from school to support his younger brothers. His childless maternal uncle, Joseph Jones, became a surrogate father to Monroe and his siblings. A member of the Virginia House of Burgesses, Jones took Monroe to the capital of Williamsburg, Virginia and enrolled him in the College of William and Mary. Jones also introduced Monroe to important Virginians such as Thomas Jefferson, Patrick Henry, and George Washington. In 1774, opposition to the British government grew in the Thirteen Colonies in reaction to the Intolerable Acts, and Virginia sent a delegation to the First Continental Congress. Monroe became involved in the opposition to Lord Dunmore, the colonial governor of Virginia, and he took part in the storming of the Governors Palace. Revolutionary War service In early 1776, about a year and a half after his enrollment, Monroe dropped out of college and joined the 3rd Virginia Regiment in the Continental Army.. As the fledgling army valued literacy in its officers, Monroe was commissioned with the rank of lieutenant, serving under Captain William Washington. After months of training, Monroe and seven hundred Virginia infantrymen were called north to serve in the New York and New Jersey campaign. Shortly after the Virginians arrived, Washington led the army in a retreat from New York City into New Jersey and then across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania. In December, Monroe took part in a surprise attack on a Hessian encampment. Though the attack was successful, Monroe suffered a severed artery in the battle and nearly died. In the aftermath of the battle, George Washington cited Monroe and William Washington for their bravery, and promoted Monroe to the rank of captain. After his wounds healed, Monroe returned to Virginia to recruit his own company of soldiers. Monroes participation in the battle was memorialized in John Trumbulls painting, The Capture of the Hessians at Trenton, December 26, 1776 , as well as Emanuel Leutzes Washington Crossing the Delaware. John Trumbull painted The Capture of the Hessians at Trenton, December 26, 1776 showing Captain William Washington, with wounded hand, on the right and Lt. Monroe, severely wounded and helped by Dr. Riker, left of center Lacking the wealth to induce soldiers to join his company, Monroe instead asked his uncle to return him to the front. Monroe was assigned to the staff of General William Alexander, Lord Stirling. During this time, Monroe formed a close friendship with the Marquis de Lafayette, a French volunteer who encouraged Monroe to view the war as part of a wider struggle against religious and political tyranny. Monroe served in the Philadelphia campaign and spent the winter of 17771778 at the encampment of Valley Forge, sharing a log hut with Marshall. After serving in the Battle of Monmouth, the destitute Monroe resigned his commission in December 1778 and joined his uncle in Philadelphia. After the British captured Savannah, the Virginia legislature decided to raise four regiments, and Monroe returned to his native state, hoping to receive his own command. With letters of recommendation from Washington, Stirling, and Alexander Hamilton, Monroe received a commission as a lieutenant colonel and was expected to lead one of the regiments, but recruitment again proved to be an issue. On the advice of Jones, Monroe returned to Williamsburg to study law, becoming a protege of Virginia Governor Thomas Jefferson. With the British increasingly focusing their operations in the Southern colonies, the Virginians moved the capital to the more defensible city of Richmond, and Monroe accompanied Jefferson to the new capital. As Governor of Virginia, Jefferson held command over the states militia, and he appointed Monroe to the rank of colonel, and Monroe established a messenger network to coordinate with the Continental Army and other state militias. Still unable to raise an army due to a lack of interested recruits, Monroe traveled to his home in King George County, and thus was not present for the British raid of Richmond. As both the Continental Army and the Virginia militia had an abundance of officers, Monroe did not serve during the Yorktown campaign, and, much to his frustration, Monroe did not take part in the Siege of Yorktown. Although Andrew Jackson served as a courier in a militia unit at age thirteen, Monroe is regarded as the last U.S. President who was a Revolutionary War veteran, since he served as an officer of the Continental Army and took part in combat. Monroe resumed studying law under Jefferson, and continued until 1783. He was not particularly interested in legal theory or practice, but chose to take it up because he thought it offered the most immediate rewards and could ease his path to wealth, social standing, and political influence. Monroe was admitted to the Virginia bar and practiced in Fredericksburg, Virginia. Marriage and family On February 16, 1786 Monroe married Elizabeth Kortright in New York City. She was the daughter of Hannah Aspinwall Kortright and Laurence Kortright, a wealthy trader and former British officer. He met her while serving in the Continental Congress. After a brief honeymoon on Long Island, New York, the Monroes returned to New York City to live with her father until Congress adjourned. They then moved to Virginia, settling in Charlottesville, Virginia in 1789. They bought an estate in Charlottesville known as Ash Lawn Highland, settling on the property in 1799. The Monroes had the following children Eliza Kortright Monroe Hay Eliza was born in Fredericksburg, Virginia, in 1786, and was educated in Paris at the school of Madame Campan during the time her father was the United States Ambassador to France. In 1808 she married George Hay, a prominent Virginia attorney who had served as prosecutor in the trial of Aaron Burr and later U.S. District Judge. James Spence Monroe a son who died 16 months after birth. Maria Hester Monroe married her cousin Samuel L. Gouverneur on March 8, 1820, in the first wedding of a presidents child in the White House. Excerpt from Plantations and slavery Oak Hill Mansion Monroe sold his small inherited Virginia plantation in 1783 to enter law and politics. He later fulfilled his youthful dream of becoming the owner of a large plantation and wielding great political power, but his plantation was never profitable. Although he owned much more land and many more slaves, and speculated in property, he was rarely onsite to oversee the operations. Overseers treated the slaves harshly to force production, but the plantations barely broke even. Monroe incurred debts by his lavish and expensive lifestyle and often sold property to pay them off. Overseers moved or separated slave families from different Monroe plantations in accordance with production and maintenance needs of each satellite plantation. One of Monroes slaves named Daniel often ran away from his plantation in Albermarle County, to visit other slaves or separated family members. Monroe commonly referred to Daniel as a scoundrel and described the worthlessness of Daniel as a runaway slave. The practice of moving and separating slave families was common treatment of slaves in the South. Early political career Virginia politics Monroe was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates in 1782. After serving on Virginias Executive Council, he was elected to the Congress of the Confederation in November 1783 and served in Annapolis until Congress convened in Trenton, New Jersey in June 1784. He had served a total of three years when he finally retired from that office by the rule of rotation. By that time, the government was meeting in the temporary capital of New York City. While serving in Congress, Monroe became an advocate for western expansion, and played a key role in the writing and passage of the Northwest Ordinance. The ordinance created the Northwest Territory, providing for federal administration of the territories West of Pennsylvania and North of the Ohio River. During this period, Jefferson continued to serve as a mentor to Monroe, and, at Jeffersons prompting, he befriended another prominent Virginian, James Madison. Monroe resigned from Congress in 1786 to focus on his legal career, and he became an attorney for the state. In 1787, Monroe won election to another term in the Virginia House of Delegates. Though he had become outspoken in his desire to reform the Articles, he was unable to attend the Philadelphia Convention due to his work obligations. In 1788, Monroe became a delegate to the Virginia Ratifying Convention. In Virginia, the struggle over the ratification of the proposed Constitution involved more than a simple clash between federalists and antifederalists. Virginians held a full spectrum of opinions about the merits of the proposed change in national government. Washington and Madison were leading supporters Patrick Henry and George Mason were leading opponents. Those who held the middle ground in the ideological struggle became the central figures. Led by Monroe and Edmund Pendleton, these federalists who are for amendments, criticized the absence of a bill of rights and worried about surrendering taxation powers to the central government. After Madison reversed himself and promised to pass a bill of rights, the Virginia convention ratified the constitution by a narrow vote, though Monroe himself voted against it. Virginia was tenth state to ratify the Constitution, and all thirteen states eventually ratified the document. Henry and other antifederalists hoped to elect a Congress that would amend the Constitution to take away most of the powers it had been granted . Henry recruited Monroe to run against Madison for a House seat in the First Congress, and he had the Virginia legislature draw a congressional district designed to elect Monroe. During the campaign, Madison and Monroe often traveled together, and the election did not destroy their friendship. Madison prevailed over Monroe, taking 1,308 votes compared to Monroes 972 votes. Following his defeat, Monroe returned to his legal duties and developed his farm in Charlottesville. After the death of Senator William Grayson in 1790, Monroe was elected to serve the remainder of Graysons term. During the presidency of George Washington, U.S. politics became increasingly polarized between the supporters of Secretary of State Jefferson and the Federalists, led by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton. Monroe stood firmly with Jefferson in opposing Hamiltons strong central government and strong executive. As the 1790s progressed, the French Revolutionary Wars came to dominate U.S. foreign policy, with British and French raids both threatening U.S. trade with Europe. Like most other Jeffersonians, Monroe supported the French Revolution, but Hamiltons followers tended to sympathize more with Britain. In 1794, hoping to find a way to avoid war with both countries, Washington appointed Monroe as his ambassador to France. At the same time, he appointed the anglophile Federalist John Jay as his Ambassador to the United Kingdom. Ambassador to France The earliest preserved portrait of James Monroe as Minister Plenipotentiary to France in 1794 After arriving in France, Monroe addressed the National Convention, receiving a standing applause for his speech celebrating republicanism. He experienced several early diplomatic successes, including the protection of U.S. trade from French attacks. He also used his influence to win the release of Thomas Paine and Adrienne de La Fayette, the wife of the Marquis de Lafayette. Months after Monroe arrived in France, the U.S. and Great Britain concluded the Jay Treaty, outraging both the French and Monroe not fully informed about the treaty prior to its publication. Despite the undesirable effects of the Jay Treaty on FrancoAmerican relations, Monroe won French support for U.S. navigational rights on the Mississippi River the mouth of which was controlled by Spain and in 1795 the U.S. and Spain signed Pinckneys Treaty. The treaty granted the U.S. limited rights to use the port of New Orleans. Frustrated by Monroes inability to convince the French of the benign nature of the Jay Treaty, Washington recalled Monroe in November 1796. He returned to the United States, where he wrote a 400page defense of his tenure as ambassador, criticizing Washingtons desire to pursue closer relations with Britain at the expense of relations with France. Monroe became a member of the DemocraticRepublican Party, a political party organized by Jefferson in opposition to the Federalists. Returning to his home in Charlottesville, he resumed his dual careers as a farmer and lawyer. Governor of Virginia and diplomat Governor of Virginia Monroe was elected Governor of Virginia in 1799, serving his first term from 1799 to 1802. The constitution of Virginia endowed the governor with very few powers aside from commanding the militia when the Assembly called it into action. But Monroe used his stature to convince legislators to enhance state involvement in transportation and education and to increase training for the militia. Monroe also began to give State of the Commonwealth addresses to the legislature, in which he highlighted areas in which he believed the legislature should act. Monroe also led an effort to create the states first penitentiary, and imprisonment replaced other, often harsher, punishments. In 1800, Monroe called out the state militia to suppress Gabriels Rebellion, a slave rebellion originating on a plantation six miles from the capital of Richmond. Gabriel and 27 other enslaved people who participated were all hanged for treason. Monroe thought that foreign and Federalist elements had created the Quasi War of 1798 1800 and were behind efforts to prevent the election of Thomas Jefferson as president in 1800. As governor he considered using the Virginia militia to force the outcome in favor of Jefferson.. Federalists were likewise suspicious of Monroe, some viewing him at best as a French dupe and at worst a traitor. Jefferson won the 1800 election, and he appointed Madison as his Secretary of State. As a member of Jeffersons party and the leader of the largest state in the country, Monroe emerged as one of Jeffersons two most likely successors, alongside Madison. Louisiana Purchase and ambassador to Britain Shortly after the end of Monroes gubernatorial tenure, President Jefferson sent Monroe back to France to assist Ambassador Robert R. Livingston in negotiating the Louisiana Purchase. In the 1800 Treaty of San Ildefonso, France had acquired the territory of Louisiana from Spain at the time, many in the U.S. believed that France had also acquired West Florida in the same treaty. The American delegation originally sought to acquire West Florida and the city of New Orleans, which controlled the trade of the Mississippi River. Determined to acquire New Orleans even if it meant war with France, Jefferson also authorized Monroe to form an alliance with the British if the French refused to sell the city. Meeting with Franois BarbMarbois, the French foreign minister, Monroe and Livingston agreed to purchase the entire territory of Louisiana for 15 million the purchase became known as the Louisiana Purchase. In agreeing to the purchase, Monroe violated his instructions, which had only allowed 9 million for the purchase of New Orleans and West Florida. The French did not acknowledge that West Florida remained in Spanish possession, and the United States would claim that France had sold West Florida to the United States for several years to come. Though he had not ordered the purchase of the entire territory, Jefferson strongly supported Monroes actions, which ensured that the United States would continue to expand to the West. Overcoming doubts about whether the Constitution authorized the purchase of foreign territory, Jefferson won congressional approval for the Louisiana Purchase, and the acquisition doubled the size of the United States. Monroe would travel to Spain in 1805 to try to win the cession of West Florida, but, with the support of France, Spain refused to consider relinquishing the territory. After the resignation of Rufus King, Monroe was appointed as the ambassador to Great Britain in 1803. The greatest issue of contention between the United States and Britain was that of the impressment of U.S. sailors. Many U.S. merchant ships employed British seamen who had deserted or dodged conscription, and the British frequently impressed sailors on U.S. ships in hopes of quelling their manpower issues. However, many of the sailors they impressed had never been British subjects, and Monroe was tasked with persuading the British to stop their practice of impressment. Monroe found little success in this endeavor, partly due to Jeffersons alienation of the British minister to the United States, Anthony Merry. Rejecting Jeffersons offer to serve as the first governor of Louisiana Territory, Monroe continued to serve as ambassador to Britain until 1807. In 1806 he negotiated the Monroe Pinkney Treaty with Great Britain. It would have extended the Jay Treaty of 1794 which had expired after ten years. Jefferson had fought the Jay Treaty intensely in 1794 95 because he felt it would allow the British to subvert American republicanism. The treaty had produced ten years of peace and highly lucrative trade for American merchants, but Jefferson was still opposed. When Monroe and the British signed the new treaty in December 1806, Jefferson refused to submit it to the Senate for ratification. Although the treaty called for ten more years of trade between the United States and the British Empire and gave American merchants guarantees that would have been good for business, Jefferson was unhappy that it did not end the hated British practice of impressment, and refused to give up the potential weapon of commercial warfare against Britain. The president made no attempt to obtain another treaty, and as a result, the two nations drifted from peace toward the War of 1812. Monroe was severely pained by the administrations repudiation of the treaty, and he fell out with Secretary of State James Madison. 1808 election and the Quids On his return to Virginia in 1807, Monroe received a warm reception, and many urged him to run in the 1808 presidential election. After Jefferson refused to submit the MonroePinkney Treaty, Monroe had come to believe that Jefferson had snubbed the treaty out of the desire to avoid elevating Monroe above Madison in 1808. Out of deference to Jefferson, Monroe agreed to avoid actively campaigning for the presidency, but he did not rule out accepting a draft effort. The DemocraticRepublican Party was increasingly factionalized, with Old Republicans or Quids denouncing the Jefferson administration for abandoning what they considered to be true republican principles. The Quids tried to enlist Monroe in their cause. The plan was to run Monroe for president in the 1808 election in cooperation with the Federalist Party, which had a strong base in New England. John Randolph of Roanoke led the Quid effort to stop Jeffersons choice of Madison. However, the regular DemocraticRepublicans overcame the Quids in the nominating caucus, kept control of the party in Virginia, and protected Madisons base.David A. Carson, Quiddism and the Reluctant Candidacy of James Monroe in the Election of 1808, MidAmerica 1988 70 79 89 Madison succeeded Jefferson as president, defeating Federalist Charles Cotesworth Pinckney in the election. Monroe won 3,400 votes in Virginia, but received little support elsewhere. After the election Monroe quickly reconciled with Jefferson, but did not speak with Madison until 1810. Returning to private life, he devoted his attentions to farming at his Charlottesville estate. Secretary of State and Secretary of War War of 1812 Monroe returned to the Virginia House of Burgesses and was elected to another term as governor in 1811, but served only four months. In April 1811, Madison appointed Monroe as Secretary of State in hopes of shoring up the support of the more radical factions of the DemocraticRepublicans. Madison also hoped that Monroe, an experienced diplomat with whom he had once been close friends, would improve upon the performance of the previous Secretary of State, Robert Smith. Madison assured Monroe that their differences regarding the MonroePinkney Treaty had been a misunderstanding, and the two resumed their friendship. On taking office, Monroe hoped to negotiate treaties with the British and French to end the attacks on American merchant ships. While the French agreed to reduce the attacks and release seized American ships, the British were less receptive to Monroes demands. Monroe had long worked for peace with the British, but he came to favor war with Britain, joining with war hawks such as Speaker of the House Henry Clay. With the support of Monroe and Clay, Madison asked Congress to declare war upon the British, and Congress complied on June 18, 1812, thus beginning the War of 1812. The war went very badly, and the Madison administration quickly sought peace, but were rejected by the British. The U.S. Navy did experience several successes after Monroe convinced Madison to allow the Navys ships to set sail rather than remaining in port for the duration of the war. After the resignation of Secretary of War William Eustis, Madison asked Monroe to serve in dual roles as Secretary of State and Secretary of War, but opposition from the Senate limited Monroe to serving as acting Secretary of War until Brigadier General John Armstrong won Senate confirmation. As the war dragged on, the British offered to begin negotiations in Ghent, and the United States sent a delegation led by John Quincy Adams to conduct negotiations. Monroe allowed Adams leeway in setting terms, so long as he ended the hostilities and preserved American neutrality. When the British burned the U.S. Capitol and the White House on August 24, 1814, Madison removed Armstrong as Secretary of War and turned to Monroe for help, appointing him Secretary of War on September 27. Monroe resigned as Secretary of State on October 1, 1814, but no successor was ever appointed and thus from October 1814 to February 28, 1815, Monroe effectively held both Cabinet posts. Now in command of the war effort, Monroe ordered General Andrew Jackson to defend against a likely attack on the city by the British, and he asked the governors of nearby states to send their militias to reinforce Jackson. He also called on Congress to draft an army of 100,000 men, increase compensation to soldiers, and establish a new national bank to ensure adequate funding for the war effort. Months after taking office as Secretary of War, the war ended with the signing of the Treaty of Ghent. The treaty resulted in a return to the status quo ante bellum, and many outstanding issues between the United States and Britain remained. But Americans celebrated the end of the war as a great victory, partly due to the news of the treaty reaching the United States shortly after Jacksons victory in the Battle of New Orleans. With the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, the British also ended the practice of impressment. After the war, Congress authorized the creation a national bank in the form of the Second Bank of the United States. Election of 1816 Monroe decided to seek the presidency in the 1816 election, and his wartime leadership had established him as Madisons heir apparent. Monroe had strong support from many in the party, but his candidacy was challenged at the 1816 DemocraticRepublican congressional nominating caucus. Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford had the support of numerous Southern and Western Congressmen, while Governor Daniel D. Tompkins was supported by several Congressmen from New York. Despite a substantial backing, Crawford decided to defer to Monroe on the belief that he could eventually run as Monroes successor, and Monroe won his partys nomination. Tompkins won the partys vice presidential nomination. The moribund Federalists nominated Rufus King as their presidential nominee, but the party offered little opposition following the conclusion of a popular war that they had opposed. Monroe received 183 of the 217 electoral votes, winning every state but Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Delaware. Presidency Domestic affairs DemocraticRepublican Party dominance Monroe largely ignored old party lines in making federal appointments, which reduced political tensions and augmented the sense of oneness that pervaded the United States. He made two long national tours to build national trust. At Boston, a newspaper hailed his 1817 visit as the beginning of an Era of Good Feelings. Frequent stops on his tours included ceremonies of welcome and expressions of goodwill. The Federalist Party continued to fade during his administration it maintained its vitality and organizational integrity in Delaware and a few localities, but lacked influence in national politics. Lacking serious opposition, the DemocraticRepublican Partys Congressional caucus stopped meeting, and for practical purposes the party stopped operating. Missouri Compromise In February 1819, a bill to enable the people of the Missouri Territory to draft a constitution and form a government preliminary to admission into the Union came before the House of Representatives. During these proceedings, Congressman James Tallmadge, Jr. of New York tossed a bombshell into the Era of Good Feelings. by offering the Tallmadge Amendment, which prohibited the further introduction of slaves into Missouri and required that all future children of slave parents therein should be free at the age of twentyfive years. After three days of rancorous and sometimes bitter debate, the bill, with Tallmadge s amendments, passed. The measure then went to the Senate, where both amendments were rejected.. A HouseSenate conference committee was unable to resolve the disagreements on the bill, and so the entire measure failed.Wilentz, 2004. p. 380 The ensuing debates pitted the northern restrictionists against southern antirestrictionists .Wilentz, 2004. p.380,386 During the following session, the House passed a similar bill with an amendment, introduced on January 26, 1820, by John W. Taylor of New York, allowing Missouri into the union as a slave state. The question had been complicated by the admission in December of Alabama, a slave state, making the number of slave and free states equal. In addition, there was a bill in passage through the House to admit Maine as a free state.Dixon, 1899 pp. 58 59 The Senate decided to connect the two measures. It passed a bill for the admission of Maine with an amendment enabling the people of Missouri to form a state constitution. Before the bill was returned to the House, a second amendment was adopted on the motion of Jesse B. Thomas of Illinois, excluding slavery from the Louisiana Territory north of the parallel 3630 2 north , except within the limits of the proposed state of Missouri. The House then approved the bill as amended by the Senate. The legislation passed, which became known as the Missouri Compromise, won the support of Monroe and both houses of Congress, and compromise temporarily settled the issue of slavery in the territories. Internal improvements As the United States continued to grow, many Americans advocated a system of internal improvements to help the country develop. Monroe agreed the young nation needed an improved infrastructure, including a transportation network in order to grow and thrive economically. However, he discerned no Constitutional authority to build, maintain, and operate a national transportation system. He therefore urged Congress to introduce a constitutional amendment granting it such power. Congress never acted on his suggestion because many legislators thought they already had the implied authority to enact such measures. In 1822, a bill to authorize the collection of tolls on the Cumberland Road was vetoed by the President. In an elaborate essay, Monroe set forth his views on the constitutional aspects of a policy of internal improvements. Congress might appropriate money, he admitted, but it could not undertake the construction of national works nor assume jurisdiction over them. For the moment, the drift toward a larger participation of the national government in internal improvements was stayed. Two years later, Congress authorized the President to institute surveys for such roads and canals as he believed to be needed for commerce and military defense. No one pleaded more eloquently for a larger conception of the functions of the national government than Henry Clay. He called the attention of his hearers to provisions made for coast surveys and lighthouses on the Atlantic seaboard and deplored the neglect of the interior of the country. Of the other presidential candidates, Jackson voted in the Senate for the general survey bill and Adams left no doubt in the public mind that he did not reflect the narrow views of his section on this issue. Crawford felt the constitutional scruples which were everywhere being voiced in the South, and followed the old expedient of advocating a constitutional amendment to sanction national internal improvements.. Panic of 1819 Two years into his presidency, Monroe faced an economic crisis known as the Panic of 1819, the first major depression to hit the country since the 1780s. The panic stemmed from declining imports and exports, and sagging agricultural prices as global markets readjusted to peacetime production and commerce in the aftermath of the War of 1812 and the Napoleonic Wars. The severity of the economic downturn in the U.S. was compounded by excessive speculation in public lands, fueled by the unrestrained issue of paper money from banks and business concerns. Monroe lacked the power to intervene directly in the economy, as banks were largely regulated by the states, and he could do little to stem the economic crisis. The resulting high unemployment and an increase in bankruptcies and foreclosures provoked popular resentment against banking and business enterprises. It also exacerbated tensions within the DemocraticRepublican Party and aggravated sectional tensions as northerners pressed for higher tariffs while southerners abandoned their support of nationalistic economic programs. Foreign affairs Bilateral Treaties The RushBagot Treaty with Great Britain was signed April 20, 1817 it regulated naval armaments on the Great Lakes and Lake Champlain, and demilitarized the border between the U.S. and British North America. The Treaty of 1818, also with Great Britain, was concluded October 20, 1818, and fixed the present Canada United States border from Minnesota to the Rocky Mountains at the 49th parallel. The accords also established a joint U.S. British occupation of Oregon Country for the next ten years. The RussoAmerican Treaty of 1824 with Russia, dated April 17, 1824, set the southern limit of Russian sovereignty on the Pacific coast of North America at the 5440 2 parallel. . Acquisition of Florida Spain had long rejected repeated American efforts to purchase Florida. But by 1818, Spain was facing a troubling colonial situation in which the cession of Florida made sense. Spain had been exhausted by the Peninsular War in Europe and needed to rebuild its credibility and presence in its colonies. Revolutionaries in Central America and South America were beginning to demand independence. Spain was unwilling to invest further in Florida, encroached on by American settlers, and it worried about the border between New Spain and the United States. With only a minor military presence in Florida, Spain was not able to restrain the Seminole warriors who routinely crossed the border and raided American villages and farms, as well as protected southern slave refugees from slave owners and traders of the southern United States. In response to these Seminole attacks, Monroe ordered a military expedition to cross into Spanish Florida and attack the Seminoles. The expedition, led by Andrew Jackson, defeated numerous Seminoles but also seized the Spanish territorial capital of Pensacola. With the capture of Pensacola, Jackson established de facto American control of the entire territory. While Monroe supported Jacksons actions, many in Congress harshly criticized what they saw as an undeclared war. With the support of Secretary of State Adams, Monroe defended Jackson against domestic and international criticism, and the United States began negotiations with Spain. Map showing the results of the AdamsOns Treaty of 1819 Confronted by the revolt of all her American colonies, Spain could hardly resist the insistent pressure upon a province which she could neither govern nor defend. On February 22, 1819, Spain and the United States signed the Adams Ons Treaty, which ceded the Floridas in return for the assumption by the United States of claims of American citizens against Spain to an amount not exceeding 5,000,000. The treaty also contained a definition of the boundary between Spanish and American possessions on the North American continent. Beginning at the mouth of the Sabine River the line ran along that river to the 32nd parallel, then due north to the Red River, which it followed to the 100th meridian, due north to the Arkansas River, and along that river to its source, then north to the 42nd parallel, which it followed to the Pacific Ocean. As the United States renounced all claims to the west and south of this boundary , so Spain surrendered any title she had to the Northwest . Monroe Doctrine In March 1822, Monroe officially recognized the countries of Argentina, Peru, Colombia, Chile, and Mexico, all of which had won independence from Spain. Secretary of State Adams, under Monroes supervision, wrote the instructions for the ministers to these new countries. They declared that the policy of the United States was to uphold republican institutions and to seek treaties of commerce on a mostfavorednation basis. The United States would support interAmerican congresses dedicated to the development of economic and political institutions fundamentally differing from those prevailing in Europe. Monroe took pride as the United States was the first nation to extend recognition and to set an example to the rest of the world for its support of the cause of liberty and humanity. For their part, the British also had a strong interest in ensuring the demise of Spanish colonialism, with all the trade restrictions mercantilism imposed. In October 1823, Richard Rush, the American minister in London, advised that Foreign Secretary George Canning was proposing that the U.S. and Britain issue a joint declaration to deter any other power from intervening in Central and South America. Adams, however, vigorously opposed cooperation with Great Britain, contending that a statement of bilateral nature could limit United States expansion in the future. He also argued that the British were not committed to recognizing the Latin American republics and must have had imperial motivations themselves. Two months later, the bilateral statement proposed by the British became a unilateral declaration by the United States. While Monroe thought that Spain was unlikely to reestablish its colonial empire on its own, he feared that France or the Holy Alliance might seek to establish control over the former Spanish possessions. On December 2, 1823, in his annual message to Congress, Monroe articulated what became known as the Monroe Doctrine. He first reiterated the traditional U.S. policy of neutrality with regard to European wars and conflicts. He then declared that the United States would not accept the recolonization of any country by its former European master, though he also avowed noninterference with existing European colonies in the Americas. Finally, he stated that European countries should no longer consider the Western Hemisphere open to new colonization, a jab aimed primarily at Russia, which was attempting to expand its colony on the northern Pacific Coast. Election of 1820 The collapse of the Federalists left Monroe with no organized opposition at the end of his first term, and he ran for reelection unopposed, the only president other than Washington to do so. A single elector from New Hampshire, William Plumer, cast a vote for John Quincy Adams, preventing a unanimous vote in the Electoral College. He did so because he thought Monroe was incompetent. Later in the century, the story arose that he had cast his dissenting vote so that only George Washington would have the honor of unanimous election. Plumer never mentioned Washington in his speech explaining his vote to the other New Hampshire electors. Administration and Cabinet Monroe made balanced Cabinet choices, naming a southerner, John C. Calhoun, as Secretary of War, and a northerner, John Quincy Adams, as Secretary of State. Both proved outstanding, as Adams was a master diplomat. and Calhoun completely reorganized the War Department to overcome the serious deficiencies that had hobbled it during the War of 1812.. Monroe decided on political grounds not to offer Henry Clay the State Department, and Clay turned down the War Department and remained Speaker of the House, so Monroe lacked an outstanding westerner in his cabinet. Monroe was the only president in the 19th century to complete two full terms with the same Vice President. Judicial appointments Monroe appointed one justice to the Supreme Court of the United States, Smith Thompson. He appointed 21 other federal judges, all to United States district courts. States admitted to the Union Five new states were admitted to the Union while Monroe was in office MississippiDecember 10, 1817 IllinoisDecember 3, 1818 AlabamaDecember 14, 1819 MaineMarch 15, 1820 MissouriAugust 10, 1821 Postpresidency Monroe once owned a farm at the location of the University of Virginia in Charlottesville When his presidency ended on March 4, 1825, James Monroe resided at Monroe Hill, what is now included in the grounds of the University of Virginia. He had operated the family farm from 1788 to 1817, but sold it in the first year of his presidency to the new university. He served on the Board of Visitors under Jefferson and under the second rector James Madison, both former presidents, almost until his death. Monroe incurred many unliquidated debts during his years of public life. He sold off his Highland Plantation . It is now owned by his alma mater , the College of William and Mary, which has opened it to the public as a historic site. Throughout his life, he was financially insolvent, and this was exacerbated by his wifes poor health. Monroe was elected as a delegate to the Virginia Constitutional Convention of 18291830. He was one of four delegates elected from the senatorial district made up of his home district of Loudoun and Fairfax County.Pulliam 1901, p. 68, 80 In October 1829, he was elected by the Convention to serve as the presiding officer, until his failing health required him to withdraw on December 8, after which Philip Pendleton Barbour of Orange County was elected presiding officer. He and his wife lived in Oak Hill, Virginia, until Elizabeths death on September 23, 1830. In August 1825, the Monroes had received the Marquis de Lafayette and President John Quincy Adams as guests there. Death Monroes grave at Hollywood Cemetery. John Tylers grave is visible in the background. Upon Elizabeths death in 1830, Monroe moved to New York City to live with his daughter Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur who had married Samuel L. Gouverneur in the White House. Monroes health began to slowly fail by the end of the 1820s and John Quincy Adams visited him there in April 1831. Adams found him alert and eager to discuss the situation in Europe, but in ill health. Adams cut the visit short when he thought he was tiring Monroe. Monroe died there from heart failure and tuberculosis on July 4, 1831, thus becoming the third president to have died on Independence Day. His death came 55 years after the U.S. Declaration of Independence was proclaimed and 5 years after the death of two other Founding Fathers who became Presidents John Adams and Thomas Jefferson. Monroe was originally buried in New York at the Gouverneur familys vault in the New York City Marble Cemetery. Twentyseven years later, in 1858, the body was reinterred to the Presidents Circle at the Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond, Virginia. The James Monroe Tomb is a U.S. National Historic Landmark. Religious beliefs When it comes to Monroes thoughts on religion, historian Bliss Isely notes, less is known than that of any other President. No letters survive in which he discussed his religious beliefs. Nor did his friends, family or associates comment on his beliefs. Letters that do survive, such as ones written after the death of his son, contain no discussion of religion. Monroe was raised in a family that belonged to the Church of England when it was the state church in Virginia before the Revolution. As an adult, he attended Episcopal churches. Some historians see deistic tendencies in his few references to an impersonal God. Unlike Jefferson, Monroe was rarely attacked as an atheist or infidel. In 1832 James Renwick Willson, a Reformed Presbyterian minister in Albany, New York, criticized Monroe for having lived and died like a secondrate Athenian philosopher. As Secretary of State, Monroe is said to have dismissed Mordecai Manuel Noah in 1815 from his post as consul to Tunis because he was Jewish. Noah protested and gained letters from Adams, Jefferson, and Madison supporting churchstate separation and tolerance for Jews.Richard H. Popkin, Thomas Jeffersons Letter to Mordecai Noah, American Book Collector 1987 8 9 11 Monroe may have believed in an interventionist God when he said, If we persevere...we can not fail, under the favor of a gracious Providence...My fervent prayers to the Almighty that He will be graciously pleased to continue to us that protection which He has already so conspicuously displayed in our favor. Slavery Monroe owned dozens of slaves. According to William Seale, he took several slaves with him to Washington to serve at the White House from 1817 to 1825. This was typical of other slaveholders, as Congress did not provide for domestic staff of the presidents at that time.Kranish, Michael. At Capitol, slaverys story turns full circle , The Boston GLobe , Boston, December 28, 2008. On October 15, 1799, as some slave traders tried to transport a group of slaves from Southampton to Georgia, the slaves revolted and killed the traders. According to Scheers article on the subject, a nearby slave patrol responded and killed ten slaves on the spot in extrajudicial killings without the benefit of trial. Of the initial group, the patrol took five slaves alive. They were tried in an oyer and terminer court without the benefit of a jury,Sidbury, James. Ploughshares into swords race, rebellion, and identity in Gabriels Virginia, 1730 1810. , Cambridge, 1997, p. 128. and four were convicted. . Governor Monroe postponed the slaves executions to check their identities he granted a pardon to one, and allowed two to hang. The fourth died in jail from exposure to the cold. Scheer says that Monroe helped secure a modicum of civil protection for slaves sentenced to death for capital crimes.Scheer, Arthur. Governor James Monroe and Southampton Slave Resistance of 1799, The Historian , Vol. 61, 1999, available on Questia When Monroe was Governor of Virginia in 1800, hundreds of slaves from Virginia planned to kidnap him, take Richmond, and negotiate for their freedom. Due to a storm on August 30, they were unable to attack. What became known as Gabriels slave conspiracy became public knowledge.Rodriguez, Junius. Slavery in the United States A Social, Political, and Historical Encyclopedia , Santa Barbara, 2007, p. 428. In response, Governor Monroe called out the militia the slave patrols soon captured some slaves accused of involvement. Sidbury says some trials had a few measures to prevent abuses, such as an appointed attorney, but they were hardly fair. Slave codes prevented slaves from being treated like whites, and they were given quick trials without a jury.Sidbury, James. Ploughshares into Swords Race, Rebellion, and Identity in Gabriels Virginia, 1730 1810 , Cambridge, 1997, pp. 127 28. Monroe influenced the Executive Council to pardon and sell some slaves instead of hanging them.Morris, Thomas. Southern Slavery and the Law, 1619 1860 , 1996, p. 272. Historians say the Virginia courts executed between 26 and 35 slaves. None of the executed slaves had killed any whites because the uprising had been foiled before it began. As president of Virginias constitutional convention in the fall of 1829, Monroe reiterated his belief that slavery was a blight which, even as a British colony, Virginia had attempted to eradicate. What was the origin of our slave population he rhetorically asked. The evil commenced when we were in our Colonial state, but acts were passed by our Colonial Legislature, prohibiting the importation, of more slaves, into the Colony. These were rejected by the Crown. To the dismay of states rights proponents, he was willing to accept the federal governments financial assistance to emancipate and transport freed slaves to other countries. At the convention, Monroe made his final public statement on slavery, proposing that Virginia emancipate and deport its bondsmen with the aid of the Union.Ammon, 1990, pp 563 66 Monroe was part of the American Colonization Society formed in 1816, the members of which included Henry Clay and Andrew Jackson. They found common ground with some abolitionists in supporting colonization. They helped send several thousand freed slaves to the new colony of Liberia in Africa from 1820 to 1840. Slave owners like Monroe and Jackson wanted to prevent free blacks from encouraging slaves in the South to rebel. With about 100,000 in Federal grant money, the organization also bought land for the freedmen in what is today Liberia.Powell Steinberg . The nonprofit sector a research handbook , Yale, 2006, p. 40. The capital of Liberia was named Monrovia after President Monroe.Ammon, 1990, pp 522 23 Honors and memberships Monroe was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in April 1818. Legacy and memory Since its 1824 renaming in his honor, the capital city of the West African country of Liberia has been named Monrovia. It is the only nonAmerican capital city named after a U.S. President. On December 12, 1954, the United States Postal Service released a 5 Liberty Issue postage stamp honoring Monroe. Monroe is the namesake of seventeen Monroe counties. The cities of Monroe, Maine incorporated in 1818, Monroe, Michigan and Monroe, Georgia incorporated in 1821, and Monroe, Connecticut incorporated in 1823, are named for him. The Township of Monroe, in central New Jersey, founded in 1838, bears his name as well. Fort Monroe is named for him. Monroe was the last U.S. President to wear a powdered wig tied in a queue, a tricorne hat and kneebreeches according to the style of the late 18th century. That earned him the nickname The Last Cocked Hat. Monroe is the last president not photographed. See also List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience List of United States political appointments that crossed party lines History of Virginia on stamps Notes References Primary sources Monroe, James. The Political Writings of James Monroe. ed. by James P. Lucier, . 863 pp. Writings of James Monroe, edited by Stanislaus Murray Hamilton, ed., 7 vols. online edition at Google Books Richardson, James D. ed. A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents , reprints his major messages and reports. Bibliography 706 pp. standard scholarly biography Ammon, Harry. James Monroe in Henry F. Graff ed., The Presidents A Reference History online Cresson, William P. James Monroe . 577 pp. good scholarly biography Cunningham, Noble E., Jr. The Presidency of James Monroe. 1996. 246 pp. standard scholarly survey Dangerfield, George. Era of Good Feelings excerpt and text search Elkins, Stanley M. and Eric McKitrick. The Age of Federalism . most advanced analysis of the politics of the 1790s. online edition Heidler, David S. The Politics of National Aggression Congress and the First Seminole War, Journal of the Early Republic 1993 13 501 530. in JSTOR Finkelman, Paul, ed. Encyclopedia of the New American Nation, 1754 1829 , 1600 pp. superficial, short, popular biography Haworth, Peter Daniel. James Madison and James Monroe Historiography A Tale of Two Divergent Bodies of Scholarship. in A Companion to James Madison and James Monroe 521539. Pulitzer Prize a sweeping interpretation of the era Holmes, David L. The Faiths of the Founding Fathers , May 2006, online version Kranish, Michael. At Capitol, slaverys story turns full circle, The Boston Globe , Boston, December 28, 2008. Leibiger, Stuart, ed. A Companion to James Madison and James Monroe excerpt emphasis on historiography May, Ernest R. The Making of the Monroe Doctrine , argues it was issued to influence the outcome of the presidential election of 1824. Perkins, Bradford. Castlereagh and Adams England and the United States, 1812 1823 Perkins, Dexter. The Monroe Doctrine, 1823 1826 , the standard monograph about the origins of the doctrine. Nico Perrone, Progetto di un impero. 1823. Lannuncio dellegemonia americana infiamma la borsa , Naples, La Citt del Sole, 2013 Powell, Walter Steinberg, Richard. The nonprofit sector a research handbook , Yale, 2006, p.40. Renehan Edward J., Jr. The Monroe Doctrine The Cornerstone of American Foreign Policy Scherr, Arthur. James Monroe and John Adams An Unlikely Friendship. The Historian 673 pp 405. online edition Skeen, Carl Edward. 1816 America Rising popular history Scherr, Arthur. James Monroe on the Presidency and Foreign Influence from the Virginia Ratifying Convention to Jeffersons Election . MidAmerica 2002 84 145 206. . Scherr, Arthur. Governor James Monroe and the Southampton Slave Resistance of 1799. Historian 1999 61 557 578. Fulltext online in SwetsWise and Ebsco. Styron, Arthur. The Last of the Cocked Hats James Monroe and the Virginia Dynasty . 480 pp. thorough, scholarly treatment of the man and his times. a new biography. White, Leonard D. The Jeffersonians A Study in Administrative History, 1801 1829 , explains the operation and organization of federal administration Whitaker, Arthur P. The United States and the Independence of Latin America White, Leonard D. The Jeffersonians A Study in Administrative History, 1801 1829 , explains the operation and organization of federal administration Wilmerding, Jr., Lucius, James Monroe Public Claimant A study regarding Monroes attempts to get reimbursement for personal expenses and losses from his years in public service after his Presidency ended. Wood, Gordon S. Empire of Liberty A history of the Early Republic, 1789 1815 External links White House biography James Monroe A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress American President James Monroe at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia James Monroe Papers at the University of Mary Washington A Guide to the Papers of James Monroe 1778 1831 at the University of Virginia Library Monroe Doctrine December 2, 1823 at the Avalon Project Elections for candidate Monroe, James from A New Nation Votes at Tufts University Ash LawnHighland, home of President James Monroe The James Monroe Memorial Foundation The James Monroe Birthplace James Monroe Museum and Memorial Library Life Portrait of James Monroe, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , April 12, 1999 James Monroe Personal Manuscripts CategoryJames Monroe Category1758 births Category1831 deaths Category18thcentury American Episcopalians Category18thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury American diplomats Category19thcentury American Episcopalians Category19thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican Episcopalians CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to France CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to the United Kingdom CategoryAntiFederalists CategoryAmerican people of Huguenot descent CategoryAmerican people of Scottish descent CategoryAmerican people of Welsh descent CategoryAmerican people of the War of 1812 CategoryAmerican planters CategoryAmerican slave owners CategoryBurials at Hollywood Cemetery CategoryCollege of William Mary alumni CategoryContinental Army officers from Virginia CategoryContinental Congressmen from Virginia CategoryDelegates to the Virginia Ratifying Convention CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party state governors of the United States CategoryGovernors of Virginia CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryHuguenot participants in the American Revolution CategoryInfectious disease deaths in New York CategoryMadison administration cabinet members CategoryMembers of the American Antiquarian Society CategoryMembers of the Virginia House of Delegates James CategoryPeople from Loudoun County, Virginia CategoryPeople from Westmoreland County, Virginia CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1808 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1816 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1820 CategoryUnited States Secretaries of State CategoryUnited States Secretaries of War CategoryUnited States Senators from Virginia CategoryUniversity of Virginia people CategoryVirginia DemocraticRepublicans CategoryVirginialawyers
The house where Polk spent his adult life before his presidency, in Columbia, Tennessee, is his only private residence still standing. It is now known as the James K. Polk Ancestral Home. James Knox Polk was the 11th President of the United States . He previously served as the 13th Speaker of the House of Representatives and as Governor of Tennessee. As a protg of Andrew Jackson, Polk was a member of the Democratic Party and an advocate of Jacksonian democracy and Manifest Destiny. During his presidency, the United States expanded significantly with the annexation of the Republic of Texas, the Oregon Treaty, and the close of the MexicanAmerican War. After building a successful law practice in Tennessee, Polk was elected to the state legislature and then to the United States House of Representatives in 1825. He served as the Speaker of the House of Representatives from 1835 to 1839, and was the only president to have also served as Speaker. Polk left Congress to serve as Governor of Tennessee from 1839 to 1841, then lost reelection as governor in 1840, and lost the same election in 1842. He was a dark horse candidate for president in 1844, when he entered his party s convention as a nominee for vice president nevertheless, he won the presidential nomination as a compromise candidate among various party factions. In the general election, he defeated Henry Clay of the rival Whig Party, primarily due to his promise to annex the Republic of Texas. Polk is considered by many the last exceptional president of the pre Civil War era, having met during his fouryear term every major domestic and foreign policy goal set during his campaign and transition to office. After threatening war, he reached a settlement with the United Kingdom over the disputed Oregon Country, whereby the territory was divided along the 49th parallel. Polk achieved a sweeping victory in the Mexican American War, which resulted in the cession by Mexico of nearly all the American Southwest. He ensured a substantial reduction of tariff rates with the Walker tariff of 1846, which pleased the lessindustrialized southern states through less expensive imported and domestic goods. He also reestablished the Independent Treasury System, oversaw the opening of the United States Naval Academy and the Smithsonian Institution, the groundbreaking for the Washington Monument, and the issuance of the first United States postage stamp. True to his campaign pledge to serve only one term, Polk left office in 1849 and returned to Tennessee he died of cholera three months afterwards. Scholars have ranked him favorably for his ability to promote and achieve the major items on his presidential agenda. However, he has also been criticized for leading the country into war against Mexico and for exacerbating sectional divides. Early life James Knox Polk, the first of ten children, was born on November 2, 1795 in a log house in current Pineville, North Carolina of Mecklenburg County. His father Samuel Polk was a slaveholder, successful farmer, and surveyor of ScotsIrish descent. His mother Jane Polk named her firstborn after her father James Knox.Borneman, p. 6 Like many early ScotsIrish settlers in the North Carolina, the Knox and Polk families were Presbyterian. While Polks mother remained a devout Presbyterian, his father, whose own father Ezekiel Polk was a deist, rejected dogmatic Presbyterianism. When the parents took young James to a Presbyterian church to be baptized, Samuel refused to declare his belief in Christianity, and the minister refused to baptize the child.Haynes, pp. 4 6. In 1803 most of Polks relatives moved to the Duck River area in current Maury County, Middle Tennessee Polks family waited until 1806 to follow.Borneman, p. 7 The family grew prosperous Samuel turned to land speculation and became a county judge, though Polk was home schooled. Polk suffered from poor health in 1812 Dr. Ephraim McDowell of Danville, Kentucky saw him for severe pain, and operated to remove urinary stones.Borneman, p. 8 Only brandy was available as an anesthetic, and the surgery may have left Polk sterile, as he did not sire any children.Seigenthaler, p. 19 When Polk recovered, his father offered to bring him into the mercantile business, but Polk declined. In July 1813 Polk enrolled at the Zion Church near his home. A year later he attended an academy in Murfreesboro where Polk proved a promising student, and where he may have met his future wife, Sarah Childress.Borneman, p. 13 In January 1816 Polk was admitted into the University of North Carolina as a secondsemester sophomore. The Polk family had connections with the university, then a small school of about 80 students Sam Polk was their land agent in Tennessee and his cousin William Polk was a trustee.Haynes, p. 11 While there Polk joined the Dialectic Society where he took part in debates and learned the art of oratory. His roommate William Dunn Moseley later became the first governor of Florida. Polk graduated with honors in May 1818.Borneman, pp. 8 9 The University later named the lower quad on its main campus, Polk Place. After his college graduation, Polk moved to Nashville to study law under renowned Nashville trial attorney Felix Grundy.Borneman, p. 10, who became Polks first mentor. On September 20, 1819 Polk, with Grundys endorsement, was elected clerk of the Tennessee State Senate.Borneman, p. 11 Polk was reelected clerk in 1821 without opposition, and continued to serve until 1822. In June 1820 Polk was admitted to the Tennessee bar. His first case was to defend his father against a public fighting charge he secured his release for a onedollar fine. Polks practice was successful, in large part due to the many cases arising from debts resulting from the Panic of 1819.Seigenthaler, p. 24 Early political career In 1822 Polk joined the Tennessee militia as a captain in the cavalry regiment of the 5th Brigade. He was later appointed a colonel on the staff of Governor William Carroll, and was afterwards often referred to as Colonel .Seigenthaler, p.25United States Army, Soldiers, 1980, page 4 Polks oratory became popular, earning him the nickname Napoleon of the Stump. In 1822 Polk resigned as senate clerk to run his successful campaign for the Tennessee state legislature in 1823, in which he defeated incumbent William Yancey.Borneman, p. 14 In October 1823 Polk voted for family friend Andrew Jackson to become the next United States Senator from Tennessee.Borneman, p. 17 Jackson won and Polk became a strong supporter of Jacksons political career and an advocate for Jacksons ideas.Borneman, p. 18Merry, pp. 26 30 James K. Polk and Sarah Childress Polk Polk courted Sarah Childress they married on January 1, 1824 in Murfreesboro, and remained childless. During Polks political career Sarah assisted her husband with his speeches, gave him advice on policy matters, and played an active role in his campaigns.Sarah Childress Polk. In 1825, Polk ran for the United States House of Representatives in the Tennessees 6th congressional district.Borneman, p. 23 Polk campaigned so vigorously that Sarah began to worry about his health. During the campaign, Polks opponents said that at the age of 29 Polk was too young for a spot in the House, but he won the election and took his seat in Congress. When Polk arrived in Washington, D.C. he roomed in Benjamin Burchs boarding house with some other Tennessee representatives, including Sam Houston. Polk made his first major speech on March 13, 1826, in which he said that the Electoral College should be abolished and that the President should be elected by the popular vote.Borneman, p. 24 Polk became a vocal critic of the Adams administration, frequently voting against its policies.Seigenthaler, pp. 38 39 Polk won reelection in 1827 and continued to oppose the Adams administration.Borneman, p. 26 In 1828, Jackson ran for President again and Polk was a corresponding advisor on his campaign. Following Jacksons victory in the 1828 election, Polk became one of Jacksons most important and loyal supporters in the House.Merry, pp. 30, 39 40 Polk successfully opposed federallyfunded internal improvements such as a proposed BuffalotoNew Orleans road, and he was pleased by Jacksons Maysville Road veto in May 1830.Seigenthaler, pp. 45 47 During the Nullification Crisis, Polk sympathized with John C. Calhouns opposition to tariffs, but Polk condemned secession and supported the Force Bill.Seigenthaler, pp. 47 48 In 1833, after being elected to a fifth consecutive term, Polk became the chair of the House Ways and Means Committee.Borneman, p. 33 In this role, Polk served as Jacksons most prominent House ally in the Bank War that developed over Jacksons opposition to the reauthorization of the Second Bank of the United States.Merry, pp. 42 43 Speaker of the House In June 1834, Speaker of the House Andrew Stevenson resigned from Congress.Borneman, p. 34 With Jacksons support, Polk ran for Speaker against fellow Tennessean John Bell, Calhounite Richard Henry Wilde, and Joel Barlow Sutherland of Pennsylvania. After ten ballots, Bell defeated Polk, who was opposed by followers of both Calhoun and Nicholas Biddle, the president of the Bank of the United States.Seigenthaler, pp. 53 54 Bells election marked the beginning of a rising antiJacksonian force in Tennessee, led by Bell and Senator Hugh Lawson White, both erstwhile allies of Jackson.Seigenthaler, pp. 54 55 In 1835, Polk defeated Bell in a rematch for the speaker office.Borneman, p. 35 In the 1836 presidential election, Vice President Martin Van Buren, Jacksons chosen successor, defeated multiple Whig candidates, including Hugh Lawson White.Seigenthaler, pp. 55 56 As speaker, Polk worked for the policies of Jackson and, after 1836, Van Buren. Polk appointed committees with Democratic chairs and majorities, including the New York radical C. C. Cambreleng as Chair of the Ways and Means Committee, although he maintained the facade of traditional bipartisanship. The two major issues during Polks speakership were slavery and, after the Panic of 1837, the economy. Polk took advantage of the gag rule to quiet the slavery debate within the House. Van Buren and Polk faced pressure to rescind the Specie Circular, an act that had been signed by Jackson to boost the economy. The act required that payment for government lands be in gold and silver. However, with support from Polk and his cabinet, Van Buren chose to stick with the Specie Circular. Polk and Van Buren attempted to establish an Independent Treasury system that would allow the government to oversee its own deposits , but the bill was defeated in the House.Seigenthaler, pp. 57 61 Polk attempted to make a more orderly house. Unlike many of his peers, he never challenged anyone to a duel no matter how much they insulted his honor.Seigenthaler, p. 62 After seven terms in the House and two as speaker, Polk announced that he would not seek reelection, choosing instead to run for Governor of Tennessee in 1839.Merry, pp. 45 46 Polk remains the only president who also served as Speaker of the House. Governor of Tennessee In 1835, Democrats had lost the governorship of Tennessee for the first time in the partys history, and Polk decided to return home to help the state party. In the 1839 Tennessee gubernatorial election, Polk defeated twoterm incumbent Whig Newton Cannon by about 2,500 votes, out of about 105,000 total votes. Polk and Jackson hoped that Polks election would serve as a springboard to the vice presidential nomination in 1840 and the presidency in 1844, but the 1840 Democratic National Convention split among Polk and incumbent Richard Mentor Johnson and failed to nominate anyone for the position.Seigenthaler, pp. 64 65 Polks three major programs during his governorship regulating state banks, implementing state internal improvements, and improving education all failed to win the approval of the legislature.Seigenthaler, p. 66 Polks only major success as governor was the replacement of Tennessees two Whig Senators with two Democrats. Polks tenure was hindered by the continuing nationwide economic crisis that had followed the Panic of 1837, and Van Buren lost the presidential election of 1840.Merry, p. 47 Polk sought reelection in 1841 against the Whig candidate, James C. Jones. Jones, an entertaining story teller who had emerged in the legislature as one of Polks most persistent opponents, defeated Polk by 3,243 votes.Merry, pp. 47 49 Polk challenged Jones to a rematch in 1843, campaigning across the state and publicly debating against Jones, but was defeated again, this time by a slightly greater margin of 3,833 votes.Borneman, p. 64Seigenthaler, p. 68 Polk was stung by the first two losses of his political career, and faced an uncertain political future. Election of 1844 1844 campaign banner, produced by Nathaniel Currier Following his 1843 gubernatorial loss, Polk became determined to become the next Vice President of the United States.Merry, pp. 43 44 Van Buren was the frontrunner for the 1844 Democratic nomination, and Polk engaged in a delicate and subtle campaign to become Van Burens running mate.Merry, pp. 50 53 Though Van Buren had the stature of a former president and was widely seen as the frontrunner, he faced opposition from Southerners who feared his views on slavery, while Van Burens favorable position on hard money and his handling of the Panic of 1837 also aroused opposition from entrepreneurial conservatives. Many Southerners supported the candidacy of former Vice President John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, the entrepreneurial conservatives rallied around Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan, and former Vice President Richard Mentor Johnson also maintained a strong following among Democrats. A key aspect of Polks strategy to become vice president was winning control of the Tennessee delegation to the 1844 Democratic National Convention. Polk defeated a challenge for the state partys leadership by former Senator Alfred O. P. Nicholson, and Polk instructed the Tennessee delegates to support his vice presidential nomination while remaining neutral on the presidency, thus opening up the possibility of a deal between Polk and Van Buren in which Van Buren would choose Polk as his running mate in exchange for the Tennessee delegations votes.Merry, pp. 53 55 Polks maneuvering was opposed at the national level by two powerful Senators, Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri and James Buchanan of Pennsylvania, both of whom sought a vice president of a lesser stature so as to clear the way for their own respective presidential candidacies in 1848.Merry, pp. 57 60 The potential annexation of the Republic of Texas by President John Tyler upended the presidential race while Van Buren and the Whig frontrunner, Henry Clay, opposed the annexation and a potential war with Mexico over the disputed territory,Merry, p. 75 Polk and Andrew Jackson strongly supported territorial acquisition.Merry, pp. 68 69 Disappointed by Van Burens position, Jackson instead decided to support Polk as the partys presidential candidate in the 1844 election, though Polk was skeptical that he could win that nomination.Merry, p. 80 However, as Van Buren continued to receive opposition from the West and South, Polks key lieutenant at the convention, Gideon Johnson Pillow, noted the possibility of Polk emerging as a compromise presidential nominee.Merry, pp. 83 84 As the convention began on May 27, 1844, the key question was whether the convention would adopt a rule requiring the presidential nominee to receive the vote of 23 of the delegates.Merry, pp. 84 85 With the strong support of the Southern states, the two thirds rule was passed by the convention, effectively ending the possibility of Van Burens nomination due to the strong opposition he faced.Merry, pp. 87 88 Van Buren won a majority on the first presidential ballot, but failed to win the necessary supermajority, and support for Van Buren faded on subsequent ballots. Cass, Johnson, Calhoun, and Buchanan also received votes on the first ballot, and Cass took the lead after the fifth ballot.Merry, p. 89 As the balloting continued, antiCass forces from the Northeast led by George Bancroft rallied support for Polk.Merry, pp. 90 92 On the eighth presidential ballot, Polk won 44 of the 266 delegates, as support for all candidates other than Polk, Cass, and Van Buren dissipated.Merry, pp. 92 94 Following the eighth ballot, several delegates rose to give supportive speeches of Polks candidacy, and Polk won the presidential nomination on the ninth ballot. After Senator Silas Wright of New York, a close Van Buren ally, declined the vice presidential nomination, the convention nominated former Senator George M. Dallas of Pennsylvania.Merry, pp. 94 95 Polk had not attended the convention, and when he learned of his nomination, Polk stated It has been well observed that the office of President of the United States should neither be sought nor declined. I have never sought it, nor should I feel at liberty to decline it, if conferred upon me by the voluntary suffrages of my fellow citizens. Because the Democratic Party was splintered into bitter factions, Polk promised to serve only one term if elected, hoping that his disappointed rival Democrats would unite behind him with the knowledge that another candidate would be chosen in four years.Haynes, pp. 61 2 The Whigs publicly scorned Polk with the chant Who is James K. Polk in reference to Polks relative obscurity.Merry, pp. 96 97 Though Polk had experience as Speaker of the House and Governor of Tennessee, all previous successful presidential nominees had served as Vice President, Secretary of State, or as a highranking general. Polk has been described as the first dark horse presidential nominee, but his nomination was less of a surprise than that of many future presidential nominees such as Franklin Pierce.Borneman, pp. 355 356 Despite his partys gibes, Henry Clay, the Whig presidential nominee and himself a former Secretary of State, recognized that Polk could unify the Democrats for the 1844 election. Results of the 1844 presidential election Incumbent President John Tyler a former Democrat and Whig had been expelled from the Whig Party in September 1841. Despite Polks support of the annexation of Texas, Tyler considered running an independent reelection campaign, but he agreed to withdraw after Jackson encouraged Democrats to welcome Tylers followers into the party.Merry, p. 103 With the threat of a Tyler candidacy averted, Polk focused his efforts on unifying the Democratic Party. When he officially accepted the nomination, Polk announced that he would serve only one term.Merry, pp. 103 104 Polk hoped that this would win him the backing of Democratic leaders such as Cass, Calhoun, Benton, Buchanan, and Silas Wright, all of whom were interested in seeking the presidency in the election of 1848. Polk avoided taking a position on the protectionist Tariff of 1842, but appealed to the key state of Pennsylvania by using rhetoric favorable towards tariffs.Merry, pp. 99 100 In New York, another key swing state, Polks campaign was greatly aided by the gubernatorial candidacy of Wright, who managed to unite the factions of the New York Democratic Party. The potential annexation of Texas also threatened to divide the party between North and South, but Polk managed to appease most Southern party leaders without antagonizing Northern party leaders.Merry, pp. 107 108 As the election drew closer, it became clear that most of the country favored the annexation of Texas, and some Southern Whig leaders supported Polks campaign due to Clays antiannexation stance. In June 1844, Clay attempted to hedge his position on annexation, but this attempt alienated antiannexation Northerners while doing little to appease proannexation forces.Merry, pp. 109 111 Polk won the election with 49.5 of the popular vote and 170 of the 275 electoral votes. Polk lost both his birth state, North Carolina, and his state of residence, Tennessee. However, he won Pennsylvania and New York, where Clay lost votes to the antislavery Liberty Party candidate James G. Birney. Also contributing to Polks victory was the support of new immigrant voters, who opposed the Whigs policies. Polk won the popular vote by a margin of about 39,000 out of 2.6million, and took the Electoral College with 170 votes to Clays 105.The American Presidency Project Election of 1844. Retrieved March 27, 2008. Polk won 15 states, while Clay won 11.Presidential Elections Maps 1844 1856. National Atlas . Retrieved March 27, 2008. President Polk, BEP engraved portrait After being informed of his victory on November 15, 1844, Polk turned his attention towards forming a geographicallybalanced Cabinet.Merry, pp. 112 113 Polk decided that his Cabinet would not contain many presidential aspirants, though he chose to nominate Buchanan for the crucial and prestigious position of Secretary of State.Merry, pp. 114 117 Polk wrote Van Buren and Wright with the intention of appointing an acceptable New Yorker to the position of Secretary of the Treasury, and the two recommended Azariah C. Flagg. Polk decided to nominate Senator Robert J. Walker of Mississippi to the position of Attorney General.Merry, pp. 117 119 Cave Johnson, a close friend and ally of Polk, would be nominated for the position of Postmaster General. Though Polk was personally close with the incumbent Navy Secretary, John Y. Mason, Polk sought to replace him due to Jacksons insistence that none of Tylers Cabinet be retained. In his place, Polk would nominate George Bancroft, the historian who had placed a crucial role in Polks nomination. For the position of Secretary of War, Polk sought to appoint Andrew Stevenson of Virginia, giving Polks potential Cabinet three slave state leaders and three free state leaders. Polks Cabinet choices met with the approval of Andrew Jackson, who Polk met with in January 1845 for the last time, as Jackson would die in June 1845. However, after news of Buchanans selection for State was leaked, Vice President Dallas and a slew of Southerners insisted that Walker receive the higher position at Treasury.Merry, pp. 124 126 Polk instead chose to nominate Bancroft as a compromise at Treasury while nominating Mason as Attorney General and a New Yorker, William L. Marcy, as Secretary of War. Polk had intended the Marcy appointment to mollify Van Buren, but Van Buren was outraged at the move, in part due to Marcys affiliation with the rival Hunker faction. Polk then further enraged Van Buren by finally choosing to elevate Walker to Treasury, and Van Buren and Silas Wright became alienated from the incoming Polk administration.Merry, p. 127 Thus, Polks initial Cabinet selections would consist of Buchanan as Secretary of State, Walker as Secretary of the Treasury, Marcy as Secretary of War, Mason as Attorney General, Cave Johnson as Postmaster General, and Bancroft as Secretary of the Navy. All would win Senate confirmation after Polk took office. While Polk put together his Cabinet, President Tyler sought to complete the annexation of Texas. While the Senate had defeated an earlier treaty that would annex the republic, Tyler sought to pass a joint resolution through both houses of Congress.Merry, pp. 120 124 Due to disagreements regarding the extension of slavery, Senator Benton of Missouri and Secretary of State Calhoun disagreed on the best way to annex Texas, and Polk became involved in negotiations to break the impasse. With Polks help, the annexation resolution narrowly cleared the Senate. In a surprise move two days before Polks inauguration, Tyler extended to Texas a formal offer of annexation.Merry, pp. 127 128 Presidency The inauguration of James K. Polk, as shown in the Illustrated London News , v. 6, April 19, 1845 When he took office on March 4, 1845, Polk, at 49, became the youngest man at the time to assume the presidency. Polks inauguration was the first inaugural ceremony to be reported by telegraph and to be shown in a newspaper illustration . Polk presided over a country whose population had doubled every twenty years since the American Revolution and which had reached demographic parity with its former colonial overlord, Great Britain.Merry, pp. 132 133 Polks tenure saw continued technological improvements, including the continued expansion of railroads and increased use of the telegraph. These improved communications and growing demographics increasingly made the United States into a strong military power, while also stoking expansionism. According to a story told decades later by George Bancroft, Polk set four clearly defined goals for his administrationMerry, pp. 131 132 Reestablish the Independent Treasury System. Reduce tariffs. Acquire some or all of Oregon Country. Acquire California and New Mexico from Mexico. While his domestic aims represented continuity with past Democratic policies, successful completion of Polks foreign policy goals would represent the first major American territorial gains since the Adams Ons Treaty of 1819. Pledged to serve only one term, Polk accomplished his four major objectives in just four years. By linking acquisition of new lands in Oregon and Texas , he hoped to satisfy both North and South. During his presidency James K. Polk was known as Young Hickory, an allusion to his mentor Andrew Jackson, and Napoleon of the Stump for his speaking skills. Personal Administration and cabinet Polk and his cabinet in the White House dining room. Front row, left to right John Y. Mason, William L. Marcy, James K. Polk, Robert J. Walker. Back row, left to right Cave Johnson, George Bancroft. Secretary of State James Buchanan is absent. Judicial appointments Robert Cooper Grier, one of President Polks two appointees to the Supreme Court Supreme Court Polk appointed the following Justices to the U.S. Supreme Court Justice Position Began activeservice Ended activeservice Levi Woodbury Seat 2 18450920September 20, 1845Recess appointment formally nominated on December 23, 1845, confirmed by the United States Senate on January 3, 1846, and received commission on January 3, 1846. 18510904September 4, 1851 Robert Cooper Grier Seat 3 18460804August 4, 1846 18700131January 31, 1870 Polk nominated both George W. Woodward of Pennsylvania and Levi Woodbury of New Hampshire in December 1845. Woodbury was confirmed, but Woodward was rejected by the Senate in 1846. Woodwards nomination was defeated in large part due to the opposition of Buchanan and Pennsylvania Senator Simon Cameron.Merry, pp. 220 221 Polk subsequently nominated Robert Cooper Grier of Pennsylvania, and Grier won confirmation. Woodbury died in 1851, but Grier served until 1870 and notably joined with the majority decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford . Other judicial appointments Polk appointed eight other federal judges, one to the United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia, and seven to various United States district courts. Foreign policy Polk strongly supported expansion, and relations with Mexico and Great Britain, the countrys southern and northern neighbors respectively, dominated Polks presidency. Polk, like many other Democrats, fervently believed in the idea of Manifest Destiny, and he sought to create a bicoastal nation. Polk was successful in pursuing this goal, as his presidency saw the partition of Oregon Country with Britain, the annexation of Texas, and the acquisition of vast amounts of land from Mexico. Partition of Oregon Country Map of Oregon Country, which the Oregon Treaty split between the Americans and British at the 49th parallel Since the signing of the Treaty of 1818, the Oregon Country had been under the joint occupation and control of the United Kingdom and the United States. Previous U.S. administrations had offered to divide the region along the 49th parallel, which was not acceptable to Britain, as they had commercial interests along the Columbia River.Merry, pp. 168 169 Britains preferred partition was unacceptable to Polk, as it would have awarded the Puget Sound and all lands North of the Columbia River to Britain. Edward Everett, President Tylers ambassador to Great Britain, had proposed a new solution that would divide most of the territory at the 49th parallel but grant the strategic Vancouver Island to the British, but Tylers term ended before negotiations could proceed.Merry, pp. 170 171 Though both sides sought an acceptable compromise, each also saw the territory as an important geopolitical asset that would play a large part in determining the dominant power in North America. On taking office, Polk announced that he viewed the American claim to the land as clear and unquestionable, provoking threats of war from British leaders should Polk attempt to take control of the entire territory. Despite Polks hawkish rhetoric and desire to annex the entire territory, he viewed war with the British as unwise and unnecessary, and Polk and Buchanan opened up negotiations with the British.Merry, pp. 173 175 Like his predecessors, Polk again proposed a division along the 49th parallel, which was immediately rejected by the British ambassador, Richard Pakenham.Merry, p. 190 Secretary of State Buchanan was wary of a twofront war with both Mexico and Britain, but Polk was willing to risk war with both countries in pursuit of a favorable settlement.Merry, pp. 190 191 As 1845 came to an end, Polk began preparations to give Britain a oneyear notice of his intention to terminate the joint occupancy of Oregon.Merry, p. 206 When the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Aberdeen, learned of the proposal rejected by Pakenham, Aberdeen asked the United States to reopen negotiations.Merry, pp. 196 197 After the brief collapse of British Prime Minister Robert Peels second ministry, Peel and Aberdeen sought closer relations with the United States as part of a reorientation towards free trade.Merry, pp. 224 225 In March 1846, Polk allowed Buchanan to inform Louis McLane, the American ambassador to Britain, that Polks administration would look favorably on a British proposal based around a division at the 49th parallel.Merry, pp. 225 227 In June 1846, Pakenham presented an offer to the Polk administration, calling for a boundary line at the 49th parallel, with the exception that Britain would retain all of Vancouver Island, and limited navigation rights for British subjects on the Columbia River.Merry, pp. 263 264 Polk and most of his Cabinet were prepared to accept the proposal, but Buchanan, in a surprising reversal, urged that the United States seek control of all of the Oregon Territory. After winning the reluctant approval of Buchanan and many of Polks Senate allies, Polk submitted the full treaty to the Senate for ratification.Merry, pp. 266 267 The Senate ratified the treaty in a 41 14 vote. After years of negotiations, the United States and Great Britain had finally settled the Oregon question. Polks willingness to risk war with Britain had frightened many, but his tough negotiation tactics may have gained the United States concessions from the British that a more conciliatory president might not have won. The portion of the Oregon Territory acquired by the United States later formed the states of Washington, Oregon, and Idaho, and parts of the states of Montana and Wyoming. The borders established by the Oregon Treaty now constitute a portion of the Canada United States border. Annexation of Texas Map of Mexico in 1845, with the Republic of Texas, the Republic of Yucatan and the disputed territory between Mexico and Texas in red. Mexico claimed to own all of Texas. The Republic of Texas had gained independence from Mexico following the Texas Revolution of 1836. Many Texians had migrated from the United States, and many Americans and Texians sought to make Texas a part of America following the Texas Revolution. Upon hearing of Polks election to office, President Tyler had urged Congress to pass a joint resolution admitting Texas to the Union, and Congress complied on February 28, 1845. Polks first major decision in office was whether to recall Tylers emissary to Texas who bore an offer of annexation based on that act of Congress.Merry, pp. 136 137 Though it was within Polks power to recall the messenger, he chose to allow the emissary to continue, with the hope that Texas would accept the offer. Polk also retained the United States Ambassador to Texas, Andrew Jackson Donelson, who sought to convince the Texan leaders to accept annexation under the terms proposed by the Tyler administration.Merry, pp. 148 151 Though public sentiment in Texas favored annexation, some Texas leaders disliked the strict terms for annexation, which offered little leeway for negotiation and gave public lands to the federal government.Merry, pp. 151 157 However, in July 1845, a convention in Austin, Texas ratified the annexation of Texas.Merry, p. 158 In December 1845, Polk signed a resolution annexing Texas, and Texas became the 28th state in the union.Merry, pp. 211 212 The annexation of Texas would lead to increased tensions with Mexico, which had never recognized Texan independence. MexicanAmerican War Origins of the war Perhaps the most important event of Polks presidency was the MexicanAmerican War. Though the United States had been the first country to recognize Mexicos independence following the Mexican War of Independence, relations between the two countries began to sour in the 1830s.Merry, pp. 184 186 In the 1830s and 1840s, the United States, like France and Britain, sought a reparations treaty with Mexico for various acts committed by Mexican citizens and authorities, including the seizure of American ships. Though the United States and Mexico had agreed to a joint board to settle the various claims prior to Polks presidency, many Americans accused the Mexican government of acting in bad faith. For its part, Mexico saw many Americans as desirous of the acquisition of Alta California and of filing specious or exaggerated claims. The alreadytroubled Mexico United States relations were further inflamed by the possibility of the annexation of Texas, as Mexico still viewed Texas as an integral part of Mexico.Merry, pp. 176 177 Additionally, Texas laid claim to all land North of the Rio Grande River, while Mexico argued that the more northern Nueces River was the proper Texan border.Merry, p. 187 Though the United States had a population more than twice as numerous and an economy thirteen times greater than that of Mexico, Mexico was not prepared to give up its claim to Texas, even if it meant war.Merry, p. 180 Following the Texan ratification of annexation in 1845, both Mexicans and Americans saw war as a likely possibility. Polk began preparations for a potential war with Mexico over Texas, and Polk sent an army led by General Zachary Taylor into Texas.Merry, pp. 188 189 Taylor and Commodore David Conner of the US Navy were both ordered to avoid provoking a war, while at the same time to prepare for war and respond to any Mexican breach of peace. Polks presidential proclamation of war against Mexico Though Polk genuinely desired to avoid a war with Mexico, he more strongly desired the acquisition of Texas and Alta California.Merry, pp. 195 196 As in Texas, Mexico had failed to establish strong control over the sprawling expanse of California, and, as in Texas, many Americans had migrated to the region.Merry, pp. 199 200 Polk was particularly worried that the British or another European power would eventually establish control over California if it remained in Mexican hands. Polk hoped that a show of force by the U.S. military under Taylor and Conner could avert war and lead to negotiations with the Mexican government. In late 1845, Polk sent diplomat John Slidell to Mexico to purchase California for 20 40million.Merry, pp. 193 194 Slidell arrived in Mexico City in December 1845.Merry, pp. 209 210 Though Mexican President Jos Joaqun de Herrera was open to negotiations, Slidells ambassadorial credentials were refused by a Mexican council of government. In December 1845, Herreras government collapsed in large part due to his willingness to negotiate with the United States, as the possibility of the sale of large portions of Mexico aroused anger among both the Mexican elites and broader populace.Merry, pp. 218 219 Herrera was succeeded by General Mariano Paredes, and Mexico began to write a new constitution. As successful negotiations with the unstable Mexican government appeared unlikely, War Secretary Marcy ordered General Taylor to advance to the Rio Grande River. Polk began preparations to support a potential new government led by the exiled Mexican General Antonio Lpez de Santa Anna with the hope that Santa Anna would sell parts of California. Polk had been advised by Alejandro Atocha, an associate of Santa Anna, that only the threat of war would allow the Mexican government the leeway to sell parts of Mexico.Merry, pp. 238 240 In March 1846, Slidell finally left Mexico after the government refused his demand to be formally received.Merry, pp. 232 233 Slidell returned to Washington in May 1846, and gave his opinion that negotiations with the Mexican government were unlikely to be successful. Polk regarded the treatment of his diplomat as an insult and an ample cause of war, and he prepared to ask Congress for a declaration of war.Haynes, p. 129 Meanwhile, in late March, General Taylor had reached the Rio Grande, and his army camped across the river from Matamoros, Tamaulipas. In April, after Mexican general Pedro de Ampudia demanded that Taylor return to the Nueces River, Taylor began a blockade of Matamoros.Merry, pp. 240 242 A skirmish on the northern side of the Rio Grande ended in the death or capture of dozens of American soldiers, and became known as the Thornton Affair. While the administration was in the process of asking for a declaration of war, Polk received word of the outbreak of hostilities on the Rio Grande. In a message to Congress, Polk explained his decision to send Taylor to the Rio Grande, and stated that Mexico had invaded American territory by crossing the river.Merry, pp. 244 245 Polk contended that a state of war already existed, and he asked Congress to grant him the power to bring the war to a close. Polks message was crafted to present the war as a just and necessary defense of the country against a neighbor that had long troubled the United States.Lee, pp. 517 518 In his message, Polk noted that Slidell had gone to Mexico to negotiate a recognition of the Texas annexation, but did not mention that he also sought the purchase of California. Some Whigs, such as Abraham Lincoln, challenged Polks version of events,Mark E. Neely, Jr., War And Partisanship What Lincoln Learned from James K. Polk, Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society, Sept 1981, Vol. 74 Issue 3, pp. 199 216 but the House overwhelmingly approved of a resolution authorizing the president to call up fifty thousand volunteers.Merry, pp. 245 246 In the Senate, war opponents led by Calhoun also questioned Polks version of events.Merry, pp. 246 247 Nonetheless, the House resolution passed the Senate in a 40 2 vote, marking the beginning of the MexicanAmerican War. Many wouldbe opponents of the war feared that opposition would cost them politically by casting themselves as unpatriotic for not supporting the war effort.In January 1848, the Whigs won a House vote attacking Polk in an amendment to a resolution praising Major General Taylor for his service in a war unnecessarily and unconstitutionally begun by the President of the United States. House Journal, 30th Session pp. 183 184 The resolution, however, died in committee. Course of the war Overview map of the war In May 1846, Taylor led the US in the inconclusive Battle of Palo Alto, the first major battle of the war. The next day, Taylor led the army to victory in the Battle of Resaca de la Palma, eliminating the possibility of a Mexican incursion into the United States. Meanwhile, Winfield Scott, the armys lone major general at the outbreak of the war, was offered the position of top commander in the war. Polk, War Secretary Marcy, and Scott agreed on a strategy in which the US would capture northern Mexico and then pursue a favorable peace settlement.Merry, pp. 256 257 However, Polk and Scott experienced mutual distrust from the beginning of their relationship, in part due to Scotts Whig affiliation and former rivalry with Andrew Jackson.Merry, pp. 253 254 Additionally, Polk sought to ensure that both Whigs and Democrats would serve in important positions in the war, and was offended when Scott suggested otherwise Scott also angered Polk by opposing Polks effort to increase the number of generals.Merry, pp. 258 259 Having been alienated from Scott, Polk ordered Scott to remain in Washington, leaving Taylor in command of Mexican operations.Merry, pp. 259 260 Polk also ordered Commodore Conner to allow Santa Anna to return to Mexico from his exile, and sent an army expedition led by Stephen W. Kearny towards Santa Fe.Merry, p. 262 In 1845, Polk, fearful of French or British intervention, had sent Lieutenant Archibald H. Gillespie to California with orders to foment a proAmerican rebellion that could be used to justify annexation of the territory.Merry, pp. 295 296 After meeting with Gillespie, Army captain John C. Frmont led settlers in northern California to overthrow the Mexican garrison in Sonoma in what became known as the Bear Flag Revolt.Merry, pp. 302 304 In August 1846, American forces under Kearny captured Santa Fe, capital of the province of New Mexico.Merry, pp. 293 294 Kearny captured Santa Fe without firing a shot, after the Mexican Governor, Manuel Armijo, fled from the province.Merry, pp. 298 299 At roughly the same time that Kearny captured Santa Fe, Commodore Robert F. Stockton landed in Los Angeles and proclaimed the capture of California. After American forces put down a revolt, United States held effective control of two northern Mexican provinces.Merry, pp. 304 306 However, the Western theater of the war would prove to be a political headache for Polk, as a dispute between Frmont and Kearny led to a break between Polk and the powerful Missouri Senator , Thomas Hart Benton.Merry, pp. 423 424 At its outbreak, the war enjoyed support across the nation. However, Whig Congressman Columbus Delano accused Polk of engineering the war, and Whig resistance to the war spread.Merry, pp. 255 256 In August 1846, Polk asked Congress to appropriate 2 million as a down payment for the potential purchase of California.Merry, pp. 283 285 Polks request ignited opposition to the war, as Polk had never before made public his desire to annex parts of Mexico . A freshman Democratic Congressman, David Wilmot of Pennsylvania, offered an amendment to the bill that would ban slavery in any newly acquired lands.Merry, pp. 286 289 The Wilmot Proviso, as it became known, injected the slavery debate into the MexicanAmerican War. The appropriation bill, with the Wilmot Proviso attached, passed the House in an 87 64 vote, but the bill died in the Senate.Merry, pp. 290 291 Polks Democrats would pay a price for the resistance to the war and the growing issue of slavery, as Democrats lost control of the House in the 1846 elections. However, in early 1847, Polk was successful in passing a bill raising further regiments, and he also finally won approval for the money he wanted to use for the purchase of California.Merry, pp. 343 349 In July 1846, American envoy Alexander Slidell Mackenzie met with Santa Anna, offering terms in which the US would pay to acquire the San Francisco Bay and other parts of Alta California.Merry, pp. 278 279 Santa Anna returned to Mexico City in September 1846, declaring that he would fight against the Americans.Merry, pp. 309 310 With the duplicity of Santa Anna now clear, and with the Mexicans declining his peace offer, Polk ordered an American landing in Veracruz, the most important Mexican port on the Gulf of Mexico. In the September 1846 Battle of Monterrey, Taylor defeated a Mexican force led by Ampudia, but allowed Ampudias forces to withdraw, much to Polks consternation.Merry, pp. 311 313 Taylor was ordered to remain near Monterrey, while Polk reluctantly chose Winfield Scott to lead the attack on Veracruz.Merry, pp. 318 20 In March 1847, Polk learned that Taylor had ignored orders and had continued to march South, capturing the northern Mexican town of Saltillo.Merry, pp. 352 355 Taylors army repulsed a larger Mexican force, led by Santa Anna, in the Battle of Buena Vista. Meanwhile, Scott landed in Veracruz, and quickly won control of the city.Merry, pp. 352 359 With the capture of Veracruz, Polk dispatched Nicholas Trist, Buchanans chief clerk, to negotiate a peace treaty with Mexican leaders.Merry, pp. 358 359 Trist was ordered to seek the cession of Alta California, New Mexico, and Baja California, recognition of the Rio Grande as the southern border of Texas, and American access across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec. Trist was authorized to make a payment of up to 30 million in exchange for these concessions.Merry, pp. 360 361 In August 1847, Scott defeated Santa Anna at the Battle of Contreras and the Battle of Churubusco.Merry, pp. 381 382 With these victories over a larger force, Scotts army was positioned to besiege Mexicos capital. Santa Anna negotiated a truce with Scott, and the Mexican foreign minister notified Trist that they were ready to begin negotiations.Merry, pp. 383 384 However, the Mexican and American delegations remained far apart on terms Mexico was only willing to yield portions of Upper California, and refused to agree to the Rio Grande border.Merry, pp. 384 385 While negotiations continued, Scott captured the Mexican capital in the Battle for Mexico City.Merry, pp. 387 388 In the United States, a heated political debate emerged regarding how much of Mexico the United States should seek to annex, with Whigs such as Henry Clay arguing that the United States should only seek to settle the Texas border question, and some expansionists arguing for the annexation of all of Mexico.Merry, pp. 394 397 Frustrated by the lack of progress in negotiations, and troubled by rumors that Trist was willing to negotiate on the Rio Grande border, Polk ordered Trist to return to Washington.Merry, p. 386 Polk decided to occupy large portions of Mexico and wait for a Mexican peace offer.Merry, pp. 403 404 In late 1847, Polk learned of Scott and Trists attempt to bribe Mexican officials in an attempt to open negotiations, as well as Scotts courtmartial of a close Polk friend, Gideon Johnson Pillow.Merry, pp. 407 409 Outraged especially by the latter event, Polk demanded Scotts return to Washington, with William Orlando Butler tapped as his replacement. Peace the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo The Mexican Cession was acquired through the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. The Gadsden Purchase was acquired through purchase after Polk left office. In September 1847, Manuel de la Pea y Pea replaced Santa Anna as President of Mexico, and Pena and his Moderado allies showed a willingness to negotiate based on the terms Polk had relayed to Trist.Merry, pp. 397 400 In November 1847, Trist received Polks order to return to Washington. After a period of indecision, and with the backing of Scott and the Mexican government , Trist decided to enter into negotiations with the Mexican government. As Polk had made no plans to send an envoy to replace him, Trist thought that he could not pass up the opportunity to end the war on favorable terms. Though Polk was outraged by Trists decision, he decided to allow Trist some time to negotiate a treaty.Merry, pp. 420 421 Throughout January 1848, Trist regularly met with Mexican officials in Guadalupe Hidalgo, a small town North of Mexico City.Merry, pp. 424 425 Trist was willing to allow Mexico to keep Lower California, but successfully haggled for the inclusion of the important harbor of San Diego in a cession of Upper California. The Mexican delegation agreed to recognize the Rio Grande border, while Trist agreed to have the United States cover prior American claims against the Mexican government. The two sides also agreed to the right of Mexicans in annexed territory to leave or become U.S. citizens, American responsibility to prevent crossborder Indian raids, protection of church property, and a 15 million payment to Mexico. On February 2, 1848, Trist and the Mexican delegation signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Polk received the document on February 19.Merry, pp. 426 427 While he remained angry at Trist for disobeying orders, Polk and a majority of his Cabinet accepted the terms of the treaty. In dissent were Buchanan, who called for more territory, and Secretary of the Treasury Walker, who wanted to annex all of Mexico. Though Polk also expressed a desire for more territory, he was eager to bring the war to a close and reasonably satisfied with the amount of ceded territory, so he submitted the treaty to the Senate.Merry, pp. 428 429 Ratification of the treaty required a 23 supermajority of the Senate, and ratification was uncertain due to the opposition of various Senators, including those who opposed the annexation of any Mexican territory.Merry, pp. 430 431 On March 10, the Senate ratified the treaty in a 38 14 vote, with aye and nay votes spread equally across partisan and geographic lines.Merry, pp. 434 435 The Senate made some modifications to the treaty before ratification, and Polk worried that the Mexican government would reject the modifications.Merry, pp. 436 437 However, on June 7, Polk learned that Mexico had ratified the treaty, thus ending the war.Merry, pp. 448 450 With the acquisition of California, Polk had accomplished all four of his major presidential goals. The Mexican Cession added 600,000 square miles of territory to the United States, including a long Pacific coastline. The modern states of California, Nevada, Utah, most of Arizona, and parts of New Mexico, Colorado, and Wyoming were all included in the Mexican Cession. The treaty also recognized the annexation of Texas and acknowledged American control over the disputed territory between the Nueces River and the Rio Grande. Mexico, in turn, received 15million. The war had cost the lives of nearly 14,000 Americans and 25,000 Mexicans, as well as the expense of roughly one hundred million dollars.Rough estimate of total cost, Smith, II 266 67 this includes the payments to Mexico in exchange for the ceded territories. The excess military appropriations during the war itself were 63,605,621. The 1853 Gadsden Purchase would later acquire another 30,000 square miles from Mexico , establishing the modern borders of the Contiguous United States. United States states and territories when Polk entered office United States states and territories when Polk left office Polk issued an official proclamation of the end of the war on July 4, 1848.Merry, pp. 452 453 Polks next task was the establishment of territorial governments in the new territories, which was complicated by the ongoing slavery debate. The Missouri Compromise had settled the issue of the geographic reach of slavery within the Louisiana Purchase territories by prohibiting slavery North of the 3630 2 latitude, and Polk sought to extend this line into the newly acquired territory. Polk supported a territorial organization bill crafted by Senator John M. Clayton that would have prohibited slavery in Oregon while staying silent on the issue in California and New Mexico.Merry, p. 454 Though the bill passed the Senate, it was defeated in the House in an effort led by Alexander H. Stephens of Georgia.Merry, pp. 456 457 A separate measure to extend the Missouri Compromise line to the Pacific coast was also defeated in the House, this time by a bipartisan alliance of northerners.Merry, pp. 458 459 As the last congressional session before the 1848 election came to a close, Polk signed the lone territorial bill passed by Congress, which established the Territory of Oregon and prohibited slavery in it.Merry, pp. 460 461 Polk feared that the failure to provide for an organized government in New Mexico and especially California could lead to independence for those remote regions. When Congress reconvened in December, he focused his efforts on granting immediate statehood to California, thereby avoiding the issue of the Wilmot Proviso.Merry, pp. 465 466 However, the divisive issue of slavery blocked any such legislation, and Polk left office fearing that the United States might lose the western territories acquired during his presidency.Merry, pp. 468 470 The Compromise of 1850 would later settle a number of outstanding issues from Polks presidency, including the admission of California as a state and the creation of New Mexico Territory and Utah Territory. Other initiatives Polks ambassador to the Republic of New Granada, Benjamin Alden Bidlack, negotiated the Mallarino Bidlack Treaty with the government of New Granada. Though Bidlack had initially only sought to remove tariffs on American goods, Bidlack and New Granadan Foreign Minister Manuel Mara Mallarino negotiated a broader agreement that deepened military and trade ties between the two countries. The treaty also allowed for the construction of the Panama Railway. In an era of slow overland travel, the treaty gave the United States a route to more rapidly travel between its eastern and western coasts. In exchange, Bidlack agreed to have the United States guarantee New Granadas sovereignty over the Isthmus of Panama. The treaty won ratification in both countries in 1848. The agreement helped to establish a stronger American influence in the region, as the Polk administration sought to ensure that Great Britain would not dominate Central America. The United States would use the MallarinoBidlack Treaty as justification for numerous military interventions in the 19th century. In mid1848, President Polk authorized his ambassador to Spain, Romulus Mitchell Saunders, to negotiate the purchase of Cuba and offer Spain up to 100million, an astounding sum at the time for one territory, equal to in presentday terms. Cuba was close to the United States and had slavery, so the idea appealed to Southerners but was unwelcome in the North. However, Spain was still making huge profits in Cuba , and thus the Spanish government rejected Saunders overtures.David M. Pletcher, The Diplomacy of Annexation Texas, Oregon, and the Mexican War pp. 571 74. Though Polk was eager to acquire Cuba, he refused to support the proposed filibuster expedition of Narciso Lpez, who sought to invade and annex Cuba. Domestic policy Polks official White House portrait, by George Peter Alexander Healy, 1858 Fiscal policy In his inaugural address, Polk called upon Congress to reestablish the Independent Treasury System under which government funds were held in the Treasury and not in banks or other financial institutions. President Van Buren had previously established a similar system, but it had been abolished during the Tyler administration.Siegenthaler, pp. 121 122 After personally winning the support of Senator Dixon Lewis, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Polk was able to push the Independent Treasury Act through Congress, signing it into law on August 6, 1846. The act provided that the public revenues were to be retained in the Treasury building and in subtreasuries in various cities, separate from private or state banks, to receive all government funds.Merry, p. 273 The system would remain in place until the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913.Merry, pp. 276 277 Polks other major domestic initiative was the lowering of the tariff, as Polk argued that the tariff should only be as high as necessary for the operation of the federal government.Merry, pp. 206 207 Though he had taken an ambivalent position on the tariff during the 1844 campaign in order to win Northern votes, Polk had long opposed a high tariff and viewed the protection of manufacturing interests as unfair to other economic activities.Siegenthaler, pp. 113 114 Polk directed Secretary of the Treasury Robert Walker to draft a new and lower tariff, which Polk submitted to Congress. After intense lobbying campaigns by both sides, the bill passed the House and, in a close vote that required Vice President Dallas to break a tie, the Senate.Siegenthaler, pp. 115 116 In 1846, Polk signed the Walker Tariff into law, substantially reducing the rates that had been set by the Whigbacked Tariff of 1842. The new law abandoned ad valorem tariffs and set rates independent of the monetary value of the product.Merry, pp. 274 276 Polks lowering of the tariff was popular in the South and West however, it was despised by many protectionists in the Northeast, especially Pennsylvania. A reduction of tariffs in the United States and a repeal of the Corn Laws in Great Britain led to a boom in AngloAmerican trade. Rivers and Harbors veto Congress passed the Rivers and Harbors Bill in 1846 to provide 500,000 to improve rivers and harbors, but Polk vetoed the bill. It would have provided for federally funded internal improvements on small harbors. Polk believed that this was unconstitutional because the bill unfairly favored particular areas, including ports which had no foreign trade. Polk believed that these problems were local and not national. Polk feared that passing the Rivers and Harbors Bill would encourage legislators to compete for favors for their home districts a type of corruption that would spell doom to the virtue of the republic.Yonatan Eyal, The Young America movement and the transformation of the Democratic Party p. 63 In this regard he followed his hero Andrew Jackson, who had vetoed the Maysville Road Bill in 1830 on similar grounds.Mark Eaton Byrnes, James K. Polk a biographical companion p. 44 Slavery Portrait of Polk by Healy, 1846 Like Jackson, Polk saw slavery as a side issue compared to more important matters such as territorial expansion and economic policy.Merry, pp. 129 130 However, the issue of slavery became increasingly polarizing during the 1840s, and Polks expansionary policies increased its divisiveness. During his presidency, many abolitionists harshly criticized him as an instrument of the Slave Power, and claimed that spreading slavery was the reason he supported annexing Texas and later war with Mexico.Haynes, p. 154 The Wilmot Proviso, introduced by Democratic Representative David Wilmot of Pennsylvania on August 8, 1846 , aimed to ban slavery anywhere in any territory that might be acquired from Mexico. Polk and many other Southerners were against the measure . Polk argued instead for extending the Missouri Compromise line west to the Pacific Ocean. That would have allowed slavery below the 36 30 latitude line west of Missouri, and prohibit it above. Though Polk opposed the Wilmot Proviso, he also condemned southern agitation on the issue, and he accused both northern and southern leaders of attempting to use the slavery issue for political gain.Merry, pp. 356 358 Polk was a slaveholder for his entire life. His father, Samuel Polk, had left Polk more than 8,000 acres of land, and divided about 53 slaves to his widow and children after he died. James inherited twenty of his fathers slaves, either directly or from deceased brothers. In 1831, he became an absentee cotton planter, sending slaves to clear plantation land that his father had left him near Somerville, Tennessee. Four years later Polk sold his Somerville plantation and, together with his brotherinlaw, bought 920 acres of land, a cotton plantation near Coffeeville, Mississippi. He ran this plantation for the rest of his life, eventually taking it over completely from his brotherinlaw. Polk rarely sold slaves, although once he became President and could better afford it, he bought more. Polks will stipulated that their slaves were to be freed after his wife, Sarah, had died. However, the 1863 Emancipation Proclamation and the 1865 Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution freed all remaining slaves in rebel states long before the death of his wife in 1891.Dusinberre, passim On March 4, 2017, tombstones for two of his slaves, Elias Polk and Matilda Polk, were replaced in the Nashville City Cemetery. Department of the Interior One of Polks last acts as President was to sign the bill creating the Department of the Interior . This was the first new cabinet position created since the early days of the Republic. Polk had misgivings about the federal government usurping power over public lands from the states however, the delivery of the legislation on his last full day in office gave him no time to find constitutional grounds for a veto, or to draft a sufficient veto message, so Polk signed the bill.Borneman, pp. 334 45 Election of 1848 Results of the 1848 presidential election Honoring his pledge to serve only one term, Polk declined to seek reelection in 1848. However, Polks actions strongly affected the 1848 race. With Polk out of the race, the Democratic Party remained fractured along geographic lines, with Senators Cass and Calhoun the leading western and southern candidates, respectively.Merry, pp. 376 377 Former President Van Buren also retained strong support among northeasterners. Polk privately favored Cass as his successor, but resisted becoming closely involved in the election. At the 1848 Democratic National Convention, which lasted from May 22 to May 25, a message from Polk reiterated his absolute refusal to serve a second term.Merry, pp. 446 447 At the convention, Buchanan, Cass, and Supreme Court Justice Levi Woodbury emerged as the main contenders. Cass led after the first ballot, and slowly gained support until he clinched the nomination on the fourth ballot. William Butler, who had replaced Winfield Scott as the commanding general in Mexico City, won the vice presidential nomination. Casss nomination from many northerners and southerners, each of whom saw Cass as insufficiently committed to their position on the slavery issue. During the course of the Mexican War, Generals Taylor and Scott emerged as strong Whig candidates, alongside antiwar Senator Thomas Corwin and longtime party leader Henry Clay.Merry, pp. 374 375 As the war continued, Taylors stature with the public grew, and he announced in 1847 that he would not refuse the presidency. The 1848 Whig National Convention took place on June 8, with Taylor, Clay, Scott, and Massachusetts Senator Daniel Webster emerging as the major candidates.Merry, pp. 447 448 Taylor narrowly led Clay after the first ballot, but Taylor steadily grew his support until he captured the nomination on the fourth ballot. Clay bemoaned the selection of Taylor, as the ideologically ambiguous Taylor had not articulated his preferred policies. The Whigs chose former Congressman Millard Fillmore of New York as Taylors running mate. In New York, an antislavery Democratic faction known as the Barnburners strongly supported the Wilmot Proviso and rejected Cass.Merry, pp. 455 456 Joined by other antislavery Democrat from other states, the Barnburners held a convention nominating former President Martin Van Buren as their own presidential nominee. Though Van Buren had not been known for his antislavery views while president, he embraced them in 1848. Polk was surprised and disappointed by his former allys political conversion, and worried about the divisiveness of a sectional party organized around abolitionism. Van Buren was joined on the Free Soil Partys ticket by Charles Francis Adams Sr., son of former President and prominent Whig John Quincy Adams. Polk did not participate in the electoral campaign, as he believed doing so would be unpresidential many members of his cabinet, however, did campaign for Van Buren.Borneman, p. 328 In the election, Taylor won 47.3 of the popular vote and a majority of the electoral vote, giving the Whigs control of the presidency. Cass won 42.5 of the vote, while Van Buren finished with 10.1 of the popular vote, more than any other third party presidential candidate at that time. Despite the increasingly polarizing slavery debate, Taylor and Cass both won a mix of northern and southern states. However, much of Van Burens support came from northern Democrats.Merry, pp. 462 463 Polk was very disappointed by the outcome as he had a low opinion of Taylor, seeing the general as someone with poor judgment and few opinions. Polk left Washington on March 6, 1849, never to return.Merry, p. 470 States admitted to the Union TexasDecember 29, 1845 IowaDecember 28, 1846 WisconsinMay 29, 1848 Postpresidency A undated daguerreotype speculated of James K. Polk, from supposedly late in his presidential term or perhaps in the months after he left office James K. Polks tomb lies on the grounds of the state capitol in Nashville, Tennessee. Polks time in the White House took its toll on his health. Full of enthusiasm and vigor when he entered office, Polk left on March 4, 1849, exhausted by his years of public service. He lost weight and had deep lines on his face and dark circles under his eyes. He is believed to have contracted cholera in New Orleans, Louisiana, on a goodwill tour of the South after leaving the White House.Haynes, p. 191 He died of cholera at his new home,Dusinberre 2003, p. 3 Polk Place, in Nashville, Tennessee, at 315pm on June 15, 1849, three months after leaving office. He had never joined any church, but received a deathbed Methodist baptism. Initially buried in what is now Nashville City Cemetery, due to a legal requirement related to his infectious disease death, he was moved to a tomb on the grounds of Polk Place less than a year later. Polks last words illustrate his devotion to his wife I love you, Sarah. For all eternity, I love you. She lived at Polk Place for 42 years after his death and died on August 14, 1891. His mother, Jane Knox Polk, died on January 11, 1852.Dusinberre, p. xii. Mrs Polk died in 1852. In 1893, the bodies of President and Mrs. Polk were exhumed and relocated to their current resting place on the grounds of the Tennessee State Capitol in Nashville. Polk Place was demolished in 1900. In 2017, state legislative action was considered to relocate the Polks remains to his fathers home in Columbia, Tennessee. Polk had the shortest retirement of all Presidents at 103 days. He was the youngest former president to die in retirement at the age of 53 . Along with George Washington, Andrew Johnson, Chester A. Arthur, Calvin Coolidge and Lyndon B. Johnson, he is one of six presidents to have died while his direct successor was in office. Reputation A statue of Polk at the North Carolina State Capitol Polks historic reputation was largely formed by the attacks made on him in his own time. Whig politicians claimed that he was drawn from a welldeserved obscurity. Sam Houston is said to have observed that Polk was a victim of the use of water as a beverage.Borneman, p. 11. Senator Tom Corwin of Ohio remarked James K. Polk, of Tennessee After that , who is safe The Republican historians of the nineteenth century inherited this view. Polk was a compromise between the Democrats of the North, like David Wilmot and Silas Wright, and Southern plantation owners led by John C. Calhoun. The Northern Democrats thought that when they did not get their way, it was because he was the tool of the slaveholders, and the conservatives of the South insisted that he was the tool of the Northern Democrats. These views were long reflected in the historical literature, until Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. and Bernard De Voto argued that Polk was nobodys tool, but set his own goals and achieved them.Schlesinger, pp. 439 455 quote from Corwin on p. 439 Polk is now recognized, not only as the strongest president between Andrew Jackson and Abraham Lincoln, but also the president who made the United States a coasttocoast nation. When historians began ranking the presidents in 1948, Polk ranked 10th in Arthur M. Schlesingers poll. and has subsequently ranked 8th in Schlesingers 1962 poll, 11th in the RidersMcIver Poll , 11th in the most recent Siena Poll , 9th in the most recent Wall Street Journal Poll , and 12th in the latest CSpan Poll . He is usually among the highestranking oneterm presidents. Polk biographers over the years have sized up the magnitude of Polks achievements and his legacy, particularly his two most recent. There are three key reasons why James K. Polk deserves recognition as a significant and influential American president, Walter Borneman wrote. First, Polk accomplished the objectives of his presidential term as he defined them second, he was the most decisive chief executive before the Civil War and third, he greatly expanded the executive power of the presidency, particularly its war powers, its role as commanderinchief, and its oversight of the executive branch.Borneman, p. 353. President Harry S. Truman summarized this view by saying that Polk was a great president. Said what he intended to do and did it.Truman, Harry S., and Robert H. Ferrell, Off the Record The Private Papers of Harry S. Truman , Letter to Dean Acheson , August 26, 1960 , p. 390. While Polks legacy thus takes many forms, the most outstanding is the map of the continental United States, whose landmass he increased by a third. To look at that map, Robert W. Merry concluded, and to take in the western and southwestern expanse included in it, is to see the magnitude of Polks presidential accomplishments. Though there were powerful forces compelling Americans to the Pacific Ocean, some historians, such as Gary Kornblith, have posited that a Clay presidency would have seen the permanent independence of Texas and California. Nevertheless, Polks aggressive expansionism has been criticized on ethical grounds. He believed in Manifest Destiny even more than most did. Referencing the Mexican American War, General Ulysses S. Grant stated that I was bitterly opposed to the annexation, and to this day regard the war, which resulted, as one of the most unjust ever waged by a stronger against a weaker nation. It was an instance of a republic following the bad example of European monarchies, in not considering justice in their desire to acquire additional territory.Ulysses S Grant Quotes on the Military Academy and the Mexican War from Fadedgiant.net Whig politicians, including Abraham Lincoln and John Quincy Adams, contended that the Texas Annexation and the Mexican Cession enhanced the proslavery factions of the United States.Stephenson, Nathaniel Wright. Texas and the Mexican War A Chronicle of Winning the Southwest . Yale University Press , pp. 94 95. Disputes pertaining to the status of slavery in the territories acquired during the Polk administration led to the Compromise of 1850, one of the primary factors in the establishment of the Republican Party and later the beginning of the American Civil War.Holt, Michael F. The Political Crisis of the 1850s . See also Inauguration of James K. Polk Historical rankings of United States Presidents List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience US Presidents on US postage stamps Manifest destiny Notes Further reading Bergeron, Paul H. The Presidency of James K. Polk . 1986. . Chaffin, Tom. Met His Every Goal James K. Polk and the Legends of Manifest Destiny 124 pages De Voto, Bernard. The Year of Decision 1846 . Houghton Mifflin, 1943. Dusinberre, William. Slavemaster President The Double Career of James Polk 2003. Dusinberre, William. President Polk and the Politics of Slavery. American Nineteenth Century History 3.1 1 16. . Argues he misrepresented strength of abolitionism, grossly exaggerated likelihood of slaves massacring white families and seemed to condone secession. Eisenhower, John S. D. The Election of James K. Polk, 1844. Tennessee Historical Quarterly . 53.2 74 87. . Kornblith, Gary J. Rethinking the Coming of the Civil War a Counterfactual Exercise. Journal of American History 90.1 76 105. . Asks what if Polk had not gone to war Leonard, Thomas M. James K. Polk A Clear and Unquestionable Destiny . 2000. . McCormac, Eugene Irving. James K. Polk A Political Biography to the End of a Career, 1845 1849 . Univ. of California Press, 1922. hostile to Jacksonians Morrison, Michael A. Martin Van Buren, the Democracy, and the Partisan Politics of Texas Annexation. Journal of Southern History 61.4 695 724. . Discusses the election of 1844. online edition Paul James C. N. Rift in the Democracy. . on 1844 election Pletcher, David M. The Diplomacy of Annexation Texas, Oregon, and the Mexican War , standard the study of Polks foreign policy Sellers, Charles. James K. Polk, Jacksonian, 1795 1843 vol 1 online and James K. Polk, Continentalist, 1843 1846 . vol 2 online long scholarly biography , short popular biography pp 195 290 Smith, Justin Harvey. The War with Mexico, Vol 1. , full text online. Smith, Justin Harvey. The War with Mexico, Vol. 2 . . full text online Pulitzer prize still the standard source, Primary sources Cutler, Wayne, et al. Correspondence of James K. Polk . 1972 2004. . Ten vol. scholarly edition of the complete correspondence to and from Polk. Polk, James K. The Diary of James K. Polk During His Presidency, 1845 1849 edited by Milo Milton Quaife, 4 vols. 1910. Abridged version by Allan Nevins. 1929, online External links White House biography James K. Polk A Resource Guide, from the Library of Congress James K. Polks Personal Correspondence Shapell Manuscript Foundation Extensive essay on James K. Polk and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Inaugural Address of James K. Polk from The Avalon Project at the Yale Law School President James K. Polk State Historic Site, Pineville, North Carolina from a State of North Carolina website Life Portrait of James K. Polk, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , May 28, 1999 Category1795 births Category1849 deaths Category18thcentury American people Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury Methodists Category19thcentury Presbyterians CategoryAmerican Methodists CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryAmerican people of Scottish descent CategoryAmerican Presbyterians CategoryBurials in Tennessee CategoryDeaths from cholera CategoryDemocratic Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party state governors of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryGovernors of Tennessee CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryInfectious disease deaths in Tennessee CategoryJacksonian members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Tennessee CategoryNorth Carolina Democrats CategoryPeople from Mecklenburg County, North Carolina James K. CategoryPresidency of James K. Polk CategoryPresidents of the United States CategorySecond Party System CategorySpeakers of the United States House of Representatives CategoryTennessee Democrats CategoryTennessee Jacksonians CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1844 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1840 CategoryUniversity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni CategoryAmerican slave owners CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law CategoryConverts toMethodism
James Earl Carter Jr. is an American politician who served as the 39th President of the United States from 1977 to 1981. Before his presidency, he served as the 76th Governor of Georgia from 1971 to 1975, after two terms in the Georgia State Senate from 1963 to 1967. Carter has remained active in public life during his postpresidency, and in 2002 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in cofounding the Carter Center. Raised in a wealthy family of peanut farmers in the southern town Plains in Georgia, Carter graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1946 with a Bachelor of Science degree and joined the United States Navy where he served on submarines. He left the Navy later in 1953 to return to his home state Georgia, where he worked as a peanut farmer. From 1963 to 1967, Carter served in the Georgia State Senate, and in 1970, he was elected as Governor of Georgia, defeating former Governor Carl Sanders in the Democratic primary. He served as governor from 1971 to 1975. Despite being littleknown outside of Georgia at the start of the campaign, Carter won the 1976 Democratic presidential nomination. In the general election, Carter defeated incumbent Republican President Gerald Ford in a close election. On his second day in office, Carter pardoned all evaders of the Vietnam War drafts. During Carters term as president, two new cabinetlevel departments, the Department of Energy and the Department of Education, were established. He established a national energy policy that included conservation, price control, and new technology. In foreign affairs, Carter pursued the Camp David Accords, the Panama Canal Treaties, the second round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks , and the return of the Panama Canal Zone to Panama. On the economic front he confronted persistent stagflation, a combination of high inflation, high unemployment and slow growth. The end of his presidential tenure was marked by the 1979 1981 Iran hostage crisis, the 1979 energy crisis, the Three Mile Island nuclear accident, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In response to the invasion, Carter ended dtente, escalated the Cold War, and led the international boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow. In 1980, Carter faced a primary challenge from Senator Ted Kennedy, but Carter won renomination at the 1980 Democratic National Convention. Carter lost the general election in an electoral landslide to Republican nominee Ronald Reagan. Polls of historians and political scientists usually rank Carter as a belowaverage president. In 2012, Carter surpassed Herbert Hoover as the longestretired president in U.S. history. He is also the first president to mark the 40th anniversary of his inauguration. He set up the Carter Center in 1982 as his base for advancing human rights. He has traveled extensively to conduct peace negotiations, observe elections, and advance disease prevention and eradication in developing nations. In addition, Carter is considered a key figure in the Habitat for Humanity project and has written several books about various topics. In reference to current political views, he has criticized some of Israels actions and policies in regards to the Israeli Palestinian conflict and has advocated for a twostate solution. He has vigorously opposed the Supreme Courts decision in Citizens United v. FEC to strike down limits on campaign spending by corporations and unions, saying that the U.S. is no longer a functioning democracy and now has a system of unlimited political bribery. Early life Carter with his dog, Bozo, in 1937. James Earl Carter Jr. was born on October 1, 1924, at the Wise Sanitarium in Plains, Georgia a hospital where his mum was employed as a registered nurse. Carter was the first U.S. president to be born in a hospital . He was the eldest son of Bessie Lillian and James Earl Carter Sr.. Carter Sr. was a descendant of English immigrant Thomas Carter, who settled in Virginia in 1635. Numerous generations of Carters lived as cotton farmers in Georgia. Carter is also a descendant of Thomas Cornell, an ancestor of Cornell Universitys founder and distantly related to Richard Nixon and Bill Gates.Reitwiesner, William Addams The Ancestors of Senator John Forbes Kerry Accessed August 31, 2016 Plains was a boomtown of 600 people at the time of Carters birth. Carters father was a successsful local businessman who ran a general store and an investor in farmland. He previously served as a reserve second lieutenant in the U.S. Armys Quartermaster Corps during World War I. The family moved homes several times during Carter Jr.s infancy.Bourne, pp. 11 32. The Carters settled on a dirt road in nearby Archery, which was almost entirely populated by impoverished African American families. They eventually had three more children Gloria, Ruth, and Billy. Carter got along well with his parents, although his mother worked long hours and was often absent in his childhood. Although Earl was staunchly prosegregation, he allowed his son to befriend the black farmhands children. Carter was an enterprising teenager who was given his own acre of Earls farmland where he grew, packaged, and sold peanuts. He also rented out a section of tenant housing that he had purchased. Education Carter attended the Plains High School from 1937 to 1941. By that time, the Great Depression had impoverished Archery and Plains, but the family benefited from New Deal farming subsidies, and Earl took a position as a community leader. Young Jimmy was a diligent student with a fondness for reading. A popular anecdote holds that he was passed over for valedictorian after he and his friends skipped school to venture downtown in a hot rod. Carters truancy was mentioned in a local newspaper, although it is not clear he would have been valedictorian anyway.Bourne, pp. 33 43. Carters teacher, Julia Coleman, was an especially strong influence. As an adolescent, Carter played on the Plains High School basketball team he also joined the Future Farmers of America and developed a lifelong interest in woodworking. Naval career President Jimmy Carter and Admiral Hyman G. Rickover, USN aboard the submarine in 1977 Carter had long dreamed of attending the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis. In 1941, he started undergraduate coursework in engineering at Georgia Southwestern College in nearby Americus. The following year, he transferred to the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, and he achieved admission to the Naval Academy in 1943. He was a good student but was seen as reserved and quiet, in contrast to the academys culture of aggressive hazing of freshmen. While at the academy, Carter fell in love with his sister Ruths friend Rosalynn Smith, whom he would marry shortly after his graduation in 1946.Bourne, pp. 44 55. He was a sprint football player for the Navy Midshipmen. Carter graduated 60th out of 820 midshipmen in the class of 1946 with a Bachelor of Science degree and was commissioned as an ensign.Annual Register of the United States Naval Academy , p. 33 From 1946 to 1953, Carter and Rosalynn lived in Virginia, Hawaii, Connecticut, New York and California, during his deployments in the Atlantic and Pacific fleets.Zelizer, pp. 11 12. In 1948, he began officers training for submarine duty and served aboard . He was promoted to lieutenant junior grade in 1949. In 1951 he became attached to the dieselelectric USS K1 , , qualified for command, and served in several duties including Executive Officer. In 1952, Carter began an association with the US Navys fledgling nuclear submarine program, thenled by Captain Hyman G. Rickover. Rickovers demands on his men and machines were legendary, and Carter later said that, next to his parents, Rickover was the greatest influence on his life.Bourne, pp. 72 77. He was sent to the Naval Reactors Branch of the Atomic Energy Commission in Washington, D.C. for three month temporary duty, while Rosalynn moved with their children to Schenectady, New York. On December 12, 1952, an accident with the experimental NRX reactor at Atomic Energy of Canadas Chalk River Laboratories caused a partial meltdown resulting in millions of liters of radioactive water flooding the reactor buildings basement and leaving the reactors core ruined. Carter was ordered to Chalk River to lead a U.S. maintenance crew that joined other American and Canadian service personnel to assist in the shutdown of the reactor. The painstaking process required each team member to don protective gear and be lowered individually into the reactor for a few minutes at a time, limiting their exposure to radioactivity while they disassembled the crippled reactor. During and after his presidency, Carter said that his experience at Chalk River had shaped his views on atomic energy and led him to cease development of a neutron bomb. In March 1953 he began nuclear power school, a sixmonth noncredit course covering nuclear power plant operation at Union College in Schenectady, with the intent to eventually work aboard , which was planned to be one of the first two U.S. nuclear submarines. However, Carters father died two months before construction of Seawolf began, and Carter sought and obtained a release from active duty to enable him to take over the family peanut business. Deciding to leave Schenectady proved difficult. Settling after moving so much Rosalynn had grown comfortable with their life. Returning to smalltown life in Plains seemed a monumental step backward, she said later. On the other hand, Carter felt restricted by the rigidity of the military and yearned to assume a path more like his fathers. Carter was honorably discharged from the Navy on October 9, 1953.Bourne, pp. 77 81.Hayward, p. 23. He served in the inactive Navy Reserve until 1961, and left the service with the rank of lieutenant. Carters awards included the American Campaign Medal World War II Victory Medal China Service Medal and National Defense Service Medal. Farming Earl Carter died a relatively wealthy man, having also recently been elected to the Georgia House of Representatives. However, between his forgiveness of debts and the division of his wealth among heirs, his son Jimmy inherited comparatively little. For a year, Jimmy, Rosalynn, and their three sons lived in public housing in Plains Carter is the only U.S. president to have lived in subsidized housing. Carter was knowledgeable in scientific and technological subjects, and he set out to expand the familys peanutgrowing business. The transition from Navy to agribusinessman was difficult, because his first year harvest failed due to drought Carter was compelled to open several bank lines of credit to keep the farm afloat. Meanwhile, he also took classes and read up on agriculture while Rosalynn learned accounting to manage the businesss books. Though they barely broke even the first year, the Carters grew the business and became quite successful.Bourne, pp. 83 91.Morris, p. 115. Early political career, 1962 1971 Georgia State Senator Racial tension was inflamed in Plains by the 1954 U.S. Supreme Courts antisegregation ruling in Brown v. Board of Education . Carter was in favor of racial tolerance and integration at one point, the local White Citizens Council boycotted his peanut warehouse when he refused to join them but he often kept those feelings to himself to avoid making enemies. By 1961 he was a prominent member of the community and the Baptist Church as well as chairman of the Sumter County school board, where he began to speak more loudly in favor of school integration.Bourne, pp. 92 108. A state Senate seat was opened by the dissolution of Georgias County Unit System in 1962 Carter announced his run for the seat 15 days before the election. Rosalynn, who had an instinct for politics and organization, was instrumental to his campaign. The initial results showed Carter losing, but this was the result of fraudulent voting orchestrated by Joe Hurst, the Democratic Party chairman in Quitman County, with the aid of the Quitman County sheriff. Carter challenged the results when fraud was confirmed, a new election was held, which he won.Bourne, pp. 108 132. The Civil Rights Movement was well underway when Carter took office. He and his family had become staunch John F. Kennedy supporters. Beginning in 1962, the town of Americus was the site of mass beatings and incarcerations of black protesters, echoing similar unrest throughout the country. Carter remained relatively quiet on the issue at first, even as it polarized much of the county, to avoid alienating his segregationist colleagues. He did speak up on a few divisive issues, giving speeches against literacy tests and against a change to the Georgia Constitution which, he felt, implied a compulsion to practice religion.Bourne, pp. 132 140. At the time of President Kennedys assassination Carter was informed by a customer of his peanut business of the killing, prompting Carter to remove himself from work and sit alone. Carter later called the assassination the greatest blow that I had suffered since my father died. A diligent legislator, Carter took speedreading courses to keep up with the workload. Within two years his connections landed him on the state Democratic Executive Committee, where he helped rewrite the state partys rules. He became chairman of the West Central Georgia Planning and Development Commission, which oversaw the disbursement of federal and state grants for projects such as historic site restoration. When Bo Callaway was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in November 1964, Carter immediately began planning to unseat him. The two had previously clashed over which twoyear college would be expanded to a fouryear college program by the state Carter wanted it to go to Georgia Southwestern College in Americus, but Callaway wanted the funding to go to downtown Columbus. Carter saw Callaway, a Republican, as a rival who represented the inherited wealth and selfishness he despised in politics.Bourne, pp. 132 145. Carter was reelected in 1964 to serve a second twoyear term. For a time in the State Senate, he chaired its Education Committee he also sat on the Appropriations Committee toward the end of his second term. Before his term ended he contributed to a bill expanding statewide education funding and getting Georgia Southwestern a fouryear program. He leveraged his regional planning work, giving speeches around the district to make himself more visible to potential voters. The last day of the term, he announced his run for Congress.Bourne, pp. 145 149. 1966 and 1970 campaigns for governor The congressional race of 1966 was shaken up in midMay when the Republican incumbent, Bo Callaway, dropped out and decided to run for Governor of Georgia instead. Callaway was a very strong candidate, and state Democrats panicked over the prospect of losing the governorship they had held since Reconstruction. Carter soon decided to follow Callaway and run for governor himself. In the Democratic primary he ran as a moderate alternative to both the liberal former governor Ellis Arnall and the conservative Lester Maddox. In a press conference he described his ideology as Conservative, moderate, liberal and middleoftheroad.... I believe I am a more complicated person than that.Bourne, pp. 149 153. He lost the Democratic primary, but drew enough votes as a thirdplace candidate to force Arnall into a runoff election with Maddox. A chain of events then resulted in Maddox, the dark horse candidate, being elected governor. The result was a sharp blow to Carter, who was left deeply in debt. His attempt to rescue the race from Callaway had resulted in the unlikely election of the segregationist Maddox, which he considered an even worse outcome.Bourne, pp. 153 165. Carter returned to his agriculture business and, during the next four years, carefully planned his next campaign for governor in 1970. This period was a spiritual turning point for Carter he grew increasingly evangelical, undertaking several religious missions in other states. Inspired by his sister Ruth and liberal theologians such as Reinhold Niebuhr, he declared himself born again, a growing movement in 1960s America. His last child Amy was born during this time, on 19 October 1967.Bourne, pp. 165 179.Hayward, pp. 39 46. The liberal former governor, Carl Sanders, was Carters main opponent in the 1970 Democratic primary. Carter ran a more modern campaign this time around, employing printed graphics and statistical analysis. Responding to poll data, Carter leaned more conservative than before. He positioned himself as a populist, quickly going negative against Sanders for his wealth and associating him with the national Democratic Party. He accused Sanders of corruption, but when pressed by the media, could come up with no evidence.Bourne, pp. 180 199.Hayward, pp. 46 51. Throughout the campaign Carter sought both the black vote and the Wallace vote, after the prominent segregationist George Wallace of Alabama. While he met with black figures such as Martin Luther King Sr. and Andrew Young, and visited many blackowned businesses, he also praised Wallace and promised to invite him to give a speech in Georgia. He implied support or dislike of private schools, depending on the audience. The appeal to racism became more blatant over time Carters senior campaign aides handed out a photograph of his opponent Sanders celebrating with black basketball players. That September, Carter came ahead of Sanders in the first ballot by 49 to 38 percent, leading to a runoff. The subsequent campaign grew even more bitter despite his early support for civil rights, Carters campaign criticized Sanders for supporting Martin Luther King Jr. Carter won the runoff election with 60 percent of the vote winning 7 percent of the black vote and went on to win the general election easily over the Republican Hal Suit, a local news anchor. Once he was elected, Carter changed his tone, and began to speak against Georgias racist politics. Leroy Johnson, a black state Senator, voiced his support for Carter, saying, I understand why he ran that kind of ultraconservative campaign.... I dont believe you can win this state without being a racist. Governor of Georgia Carters official portrait as Governor Carter was sworn in as the 76th Governor of Georgia on January 12, 1971. He declared in his inaugural speech that the time of racial discrimination is over. . . . No poor, rural, weak, or black person should ever have to bear the additional burden of being deprived of the opportunity for an education, a job or simple justice. The crowd was reportedly shocked by this message, contrasting starkly with Georgias political culture and particularly Carters campaign. The many segregationists who had supported Carter during the race felt betrayed. Time magazine ran a story on the progressive New South governors elected that year in a May 1971 issue, featuring a cover illustration of Carter.Bourne, pp. 200 201.Hayward, pp. 49 55. Lester Maddox, Carters predecessor as governor, became lieutenant governor. Carter had endorsed Maddox, although the two did not campaign as a ticket. The two found little common ground during their four years of service, often publicly feuding with each other.Bourne, p. 204. Richard Russell Jr., then President pro tempore of the United States Senate, died in office during Carters second week in office the newly inaugurated governor appointed David H. Gambrell, state Democratic Party chair, to fill Russells unexpired term in the SenateBourne, pp. 201 202. a week after Russells death on February 1. With Carters reluctance to engage in backslapping and political favors, the legislature found him frustrating to work with.Hayward, pp. 55 56. He looked to aggressively expand the governors authority while reducing the complexity of the state government. Therefore, he negotiated a bill allowing him to propose executive restructuring and to force a vote on it. He implemented zerobased budgeting within state departments and added a Judicial Selection Commission to verify the credentials of judges appointed by the governor.Bourne, pp. 204 212. The reorganization plan was submitted in January 1972, but had a cool reception in the legislature. But after two weeks of negotiations, it was passed at midnight on the last day of the session.Bourne, pp. 214 220. Ultimately he merged about 300 state agencies into 22 a fact he would emphasize in his presidential run although it is disputed that there were any overall cost savings from doing so. In an April 3, 1971 televised appearance, when asked if he was in favor of a requirement that candidates for Governor and Lieutenant Governor of Georgia would have to run on the same ticket, Carter said, Ive never really thought we needed a lieutenant governor in Georgia. The lieutenant governor is part of the executive branch of government and Ive always felt ever since I was in the state Senate that the executive branches should be separate. Carter later clarified he would not introduce an amendment to put such a restriction in place. On July 8, 1971, during an appearance in Columbus, Georgia, Carter stated his intent to establish a Georgia Human Rights Council that would work toward solving issues within the state ahead of any potential violence. In a July 13, 1971 news conference, Carter announced his ordering of department heads to reduce spending for the aid of preventing a 57 million deficit by the end of the 1972 fiscal year, specifying that each state department would be impacted and estimating that 5 more than revenue being taken in by the government would be lost if state departments continued full using allocated funds. On January 13, 1972, Carter requested the state legislature provide funding for an Early Childhood Development Program along with prison reform programs and 48 million in pay taxes for nearly all state employees. On March 1, 1972, Carter stated a possible usage of a special session of the General Assembly could take place in the event that the Justice Department opted to turn down any reapportionment plans by either the House or Senate. Civil rights were a heartfelt priority for Carter. He expanded the number of black state employees, judges, and board members. He hired Rita Jackson Samuels, a black woman, to advise him on potential appointments. He placed portraits of Martin Luther King Jr. and two other prominent black Georgians in the capitol building, even as the Ku Klux Klan picketed the unveiling ceremony. Still, Carter tried to keep his conservative allies comfortable. He cosponsored an antibusing resolution with George Wallace at the 1971 National Governors Conference,Bourne, pp. 212 213. which Carter also hosted. After the U.S. Supreme Court threw out Georgias death penalty statute in Furman v. Georgia , Carter signed a revised death penalty statute which addressed the courts objections, thus reintroducing the practice in the state. Carter later regretted endorsing the death penalty, saying, I didnt see the injustice of it as I do now. Carter pushed reforms through the legislature to provide equal state aid to schools in the wealthy and poor areas of Georgia, set up community centers for mentally handicapped children, and increased educational programs for convicts. He took pride in his program for the appointment of judges and state government officials. Under this program, all such appointments were based on merit, rather than political influence. In one of his more controversial decisions, he vetoed a plan to build a dam on Georgias Flint River. After surveying the river and the literature himself, he argued that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers was underestimating both the projects cost and its impact on the region. The veto won the attention of environmentalists nationwide.Bourne, pp. 250 251. When Lieutenant William Calley was convicted in a military trial and sentenced to life for his role in the My Lai Massacre in South Vietnam, a politically polarizing issue, Carter avoided paying direct tribute to Calley. He instead instituted American Fighting Mans Day and asked Georgians to drive for a week with their lights on in support of the military.Bourne, pp. 213 214. National ambition Looking toward a potential presidential run, Carter engaged himself in national politics and public appearances. He was named to several southern planning commissions and was a delegate to the 1972 Democratic National Convention, where the liberal U.S. Senator George McGovern was the likely presidential nominee. Carter tried to ingratiate himself with the conservative, antiMcGovern voters, so that the convention would consider him for McGoverns running mate on a compromise ticket. He endorsed Senator Henry Scoop Jackson, in part to distance himself from George Wallace. Carter was still fairly obscure at the time, and his attempt at triangulation failed the 1972 Democratic ticket went to McGovern and Senator Thomas Eagleton.Bourne, pp. 221 230. After McGoverns loss in November 1972, Carter began meeting regularly with his fledgling campaign staff. He had quietly decided to begin putting a presidential bid together. He tried unsuccessfully to become chairman of the National Governors Association to boost his visibility. On David Rockefellers endorsement he was named to the Trilateral Commission in April 1973. The following year he was named chairman of the Democratic National Committees congressional, as well as gubernatorial, campaigns.Bourne, pp. 237 250. In 1973 he appeared on the game show Whats My Line , where a group of celebrity panelists would try to guess his occupation. None recognized him and it took several rounds of questionandanswer before movie critic Gene Shalit correctly guessed he was a governor.Zelizer, p. 15. 1976 presidential campaign Democratic primary The electoral map of the 1976 election On December 12, 1974, Carter announced his candidacy for President of the United States at National Press Club in Washington, D.C., his speech containing themes of domestic inequality, optimism, and change.Address Announcing Candidacy for the Democratic Presidential Nomination at the National Press Club in Washington, DC When Carter entered the Democratic Party presidential primaries, he was considered to have little chance against nationally betterknown politicians his name recognition was two percent. As late as January 26, 1976, Carter was the first choice of only four percent of Democratic voters, according to a Gallup poll. Yet by midMarch 1976 Carter was not only far ahead of the active contenders for the Democratic presidential nomination, he also led President Ford by a few percentage points, according to Shoup.Shoup , The Carter Presidency and Beyond As the Watergate scandal of President Nixon was still fresh in the voters minds, Carters position as an outsider, distant from Washington, D.C., became an asset. He promoted government reorganization. Carter published Why Not the Best in June 1976 to help introduce himself to the American public. Carter and President Gerald Ford debating at the Walnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia Carter became the frontrunner early on by winning the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary. He used a twoprong strategy in the South, which most had tacitly conceded to Alabamas George Wallace, Carter ran as a moderate favorite son. When Wallace proved to be a spent force, Carter swept the region. In the North, Carter appealed largely to conservative Christian and rural voters he had little chance of winning a majority in most states. He won several Northern states by building the largest single bloc. Carters strategy involved reaching a region before another candidate could extend influence there. He had traveled over 50,000 miles, visited 37 states, and delivered over 200 speeches before any other candidate announced that he was in the race. Initially dismissed as a regional candidate, Carter proved to be the Democrat with the most effective national strategy, and he clinched the nomination. Campaign flyer from Democratic Party presidential primary The national news media discovered and promoted Carter, as Lawrence Shoup noted in his 1980 book The Carter Presidency and Beyond Carter, responding to an interviewer in April 1976 during his Presidential campaign, said I have nothing against a community that is ...trying to maintain the ethnic purity of their neighborhoods, as quoted in THE CAMPAIGN Candidate Carter I Apologize in TIME Magazine . His remark was intended as supportive of openhousing laws, but specifying opposition to government efforts to inject black families into a white neighborhood just to create some sort of integration. The remarks caused some controversy, but Carter apologized for the unfortunate choice of words, and his campaign was not seriously affected. 1976 general election On July 15, 1976, Carter announced he had chosen Senator Walter F. Mondale as his running mate. He attacked Washington in his speeches, and offered a religious salve for the nations wounds.American Presidency, Brinkley and Dyer, 2004. Carters stated positions during his campaign include his support for the creation of a federal consumer protection agency, creating a separate department for education, signing a peace treaty with the Soviet Union against the usage of nuclear weapon usage, reducing the defense budget, a tax proposal implementing a substantial increase toward those who have the higher incomes alongside a levy reduction on taxpayers with lower and middle incomes, and having a balanced budget by the end of his tenure. Carter and Gerald Ford faced off in three televised debates during the 1976 election. The debates were the first Presidential debates since 1960. Carter was interviewed by Robert Scheer of Playboy for the November 1976 issue, which hit the newsstands a couple of weeks before the election. While discussing his religions view of pride, Carter said Ive looked on a lot of women with lust. Ive committed adultery in my heart many times.The Playboy Interview Jimmy Carter. Robert Scheer. Playboy , November 1976, Vol. 23, Iss. 11, pp. 63 86. This and his admission in another interview that he didnt mind if people uttered the word fuck led to a media feeding frenzy and critics lamenting the erosion of boundary between politicians and their private intimate lives.Jimmy Carters Lust in the Heart Playboy Interview 1976 Washington Post Carter began the race with a sizable lead over Ford, who narrowed the gap during the campaign, but lost to Carter in a narrow defeat on November 2, 1976. Carter won the popular vote by 50.1 percent to 48.0 percent for Ford, and received 297 electoral votes to Fords 240. Carter carried fewer states than Ford 23 states to the defeated Fords 27 yet Carter won with the largest percentage of the popular vote of any nonincumbent since Dwight Eisenhower. Presidency Robert Templetons portrait of President Carter, displayed in the National Portrait Gallery, Washington DC Carters tenure was a time of continuing inflation and recession, as well as an energy crisis. Among his first acts was the fulfillment of a campaign promise by issuing an executive order declaring unconditional amnesty for Vietnam Warera draft evaders.Online NewsHour Remembering Vietnam Carters Pardon On January 7, 1980, Carter signed Law H.R. 5860 aka Public Law 96185 known as The Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act of 1979 , bailing out Chrysler Corporation. He canceled military pay raises during a time of high inflation and government deficits. Carter attempted to calm various conflicts around the world, most visibly in the Middle East with the signing of the Camp David Accords giving back the Panama Canal and signing the SALT II nuclear arms reduction treaty with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev. His final year was marred by the Iran hostage crisis, which contributed to him losing the 1980 election to Ronald Reagan. Transition On November 22, 1976, Carter conducted his first visit to Washington after being elected, meeting with Director of the Office of Management James Lynn and United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfield at the Blair House, and holding an afternoon meeting with President Ford at the White House. The following day, Carter conferred with congressional leaders, expressing that his meetings with cabinet members had been very helpful and saying Ford had requested he seek out his assistance if needing anything. On December 3, 1976, during a news conference, Carter announced his choice of Cyrus R. Vance for United States Secretary of State and Thomas Bertram Lance as his budget director. On December 9, Carter was presented plans for reform on housing, transportation, and urban development during a meeting with transition advisors at the Blair House. On December 13, Carters election was confirmed by the Electoral College. On December 20, Carter announced his choice of Juanita M. Kreps for United States Secretary of Commerce, Griffin Bell for United States Attorney General, and Robert Bergland for United States Secretary of Agriculture. On January 4, 1977, Carter told reporters that he would free himself from potential conflicts of interest by leaving his peanut business in the hands of trustees. On January 6, Carter requested former Governor of Maine Kenneth M. Curtis as Chairman of the Democratic National Committee. On January 13, Carter set up an economic summit meeting for nonCommunist countries in a call with foreign leaders from Japan, France, Germany, and Great Britain. The conference was set for April. On January 18, Carter named John F. OLeary for Administrator of the Federal Energy Administration, William Nordhaus and Lyle E. Gramley for membership on the Council of Economic Advisors, Anthony M. Solomon for Undersecretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs, C. Fred Bergsten for Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs, and Kenneth S. Axelson for Deputy Secretary of the Treasury. Domestic policy U.S. energy crisis On April 18, 1977, Carter delivered a televised speech declaring that the U.S. energy crisis during the 1970s was the moral equivalent of war. He encouraged energy conservation by all U.S. citizens and installed solar water heating panels on the White House. He wore sweaters to offset turning down the heat in the White House.Craig Shirley, Days of Malaise and Jimmy Carters Solar Panels. October 8, 2010, Fox News . On August 4, 1977, Carter signed the Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977, forming the Department of Energy, the first new cabinet position in eleven years. During the signing ceremony, Carter cited the impending crisis of energy shortages with causing the necessity of the legislation.Department of Energy Organization Act and Bill Amending the Small Business Administration Act Remarks on Signing S. 826 and H.R. 692 Into Law. At the start of a September 29, 1977 news conference, under the impression he had not come across well in addressing energy during his prior press session, Carter stated that the House of Representatives had adopted almost all of the energy proposal he had made five months prior and called the compromise a turning point in establishing a comprehensive energy program.The Presidents News Conference The following month, on October 13, Carter stated he believed in the Senates ability to pass the energy reform bill and identified energy as the most important domestic issue that we will face while I am in office.The Presidents News Conference On January 12, 1978, during a press conference, Carter said the continued discussions about his energy reform proposal had been long and divisive and arduous as well as hindering to national issues that needed to be addressed with the implementation of the law.The Presidents News Conference In an April 11, 1978 news conference, Carter said his biggest surprise in the nature of a disappointment since becoming president was the difficulty Congress had in passing legislation, citing the energy reform bill in particular I never dreamed a year ago in April when I proposed this matter to the Congress that a year later it still would not be resolved.The Presidents News Conference On March 1, 1979, Carter submitted a standby gasoline rationing plan per the request of Congress.Standby Gasoline Rationing Plan Message to the Congress Transmitting the Plan. Carter delivered an address stressing the urgency of energy conservation on April 5.Energy Address to the Nation. During an April 30 news conference, Carter said it was imperative that the House commerce committee approve the standby gasoline rationing plan and called on Congress to pass the several other standby energy conservation plans he had proposed.The Presidents News Conference On July 15, 1979, Carter delivered a nationally televised address in which he identified what he believed to be a crisis of confidence among the American people, under the advisement of pollster Pat Caddell who believed Americans faced a crisis in confidence from events of the 1960s and 1970s prior to Carter taking office. The address would be cited as Carters malaise speech, memorable for mixed reactions and his use of rhetoric. The speechs negative reception came from a view that Carter did not state efforts on his own part to address the energy crisis and was too reliant on Americans. Carter meeting Deng Xiaoping, leader of China from 1978 to 1992 EPA Love Canal Superfund In 1978, Carter declared a federal emergency in the neighborhood of Love Canal in the city of Niagara Falls, New York. More than 800 families were evacuated from the neighborhood, which was built on top of a toxic waste landfill. The Superfund law was created in response to the situation.Robert W. Kolb, Encyclopedia of Business Ethics and Society. SAGE Publications, 2008. Page 1305 Federal disaster money was appropriated to demolish the approximately 500 houses, the 99th Street School, and the 93rd Street School, which were built on top of the dump and to remediate the dump and construct a containment area for the hazardous wastes. This was the first time that such a process had been undertaken. Carter acknowledged that several more Love Canals existed across the country, and that discovering such hazardous dumpsites was one of the grimmest discoveries of our modern era.Paul E. Rosenfeld and Lydia Feng, Risks of Hazardous Wastes. William Andrew, 2011. Relations with Congress Carters refusal to play by Washington rules,Zelizer, pp. 5355 missed and never returned phone calls on his part, verbal insults, and an unwillingness to return political favors contributed to Carters lack of ability to pass legislation through Congress. During a February 23, 1977 press conference, Carter stated that it was inevitable that he would come into conflict with Congress and added that he had found a growing sense of cooperation with Congress and met in the past with congressional members of both parties.The Presidents News Conference Carter developed a bitter feeling following an unsuccessful attempt at having Congress enact the scrapping of several water projects, which he had requested during his first 100 days in office and received opposition from members of his party. As a rift ensued between the White House and Congress afterward, Carter noted the liberal wing of the Democratic Party was the most ardently against his policies, attributing this to Ted Kennedy wanting the presidency.Carter, Jimmy Our Endangered Values Americas Moral Crisis , p. 8, , Simon Schuster Carter, thinking he had support from 74 Congressmen, issued a hit list of 19 projects that he claimed were pork barrel spending that he claimed would result in a veto on his part if included in any legislation. He found himself at odds with Congressional Democrats once more, Speaker of the House of Representatives Tip ONeill finding it inappropriate for a president to pursue what had traditionally been the role of Congress. Carter was also weakened by a signing a bill that contained many of the hit list projects. At a July 28, 1977 news conference, assessing the first six months of his presidency, Carter spoke of his improved understanding of Congress I have learned to respect the Congress more in an individual basis. Ive been favorably impressed at the high degree of concentrated experience and knowledge that individual Members of Congress can bring on a specific subject, where theyve been the chairman of a subcommittee or committee for many years and have focused their attention on this particular aspect of government life which I will never be able to do.The Presidents News Conference Economy Carters presidency had an economic history of two roughly equal periods, the first two years being a time of continuing recovery from the severe 1973 75 recession, which had left fixed investment at its lowest level since the 1970 recession and unemployment at 9, and the last two years marked by doubledigit inflation, coupled with very high interest rates,Frum, p. 292 oil shortages, and slow economic growth. Following a period of growth in 1977 and 1978 that saw the creation of million net new jobs and real median household income growth by 5, the 1979 energy crisis ended this period of growth, however, and as both inflation and interest rates rose, economic growth, job creation, and consumer confidence declined sharply.Frum, p. 292 The relatively loose monetary policy adopted by Federal Reserve Board Chairman G. William Miller, had already contributed to somewhat higher inflation, rising from 5.8 in 1976 to 7.7 in 1978. The sudden doubling of crude oil prices by OPEC, the worlds leading oil exporting cartel, forced inflation to doubledigit levels, averaging 11.3 in 1979 and 13.5 in 1980. The sudden shortage of gasoline as the 1979 summer vacation season began exacerbated the problem, and would come to symbolize the crisis among the public in general the acute shortage, originating in the shutdown of Amerada Hess refining facilities, led to a lawsuit against the company that year by the Federal Government. Deregulation President Jimmy Carter signs the Airline Deregulation Act. In 1977, Carter appointed Alfred E. Kahn, a professor of economics at Cornell University, to be chair of the Civil Aeronautics Board . He was part of a push for deregulation of the industry, supported by leading economists, leading think tanks in Washington, a civil society coalition advocating the reform , the head of the regulatory agency, Senate leadership, the Carter administration, and even some in the airline industry. This coalition swiftly gained legislative results in 1978. The Airline Deregulation Act was signed into law by President Carter on October 24, 1978. The main purpose of the act was to remove government control over fares, routes and market entry from commercial aviation. The Civil Aeronautics Boards powers of regulation were to be phased out, eventually allowing market forces to determine routes and fares. The Act did not remove or diminish the FAAs regulatory powers over all aspects of airline safety. In 1979, Carter deregulated the American beer industry by making it legal to sell malt, hops, and yeast to American home brewers for the first time since the effective 1920 beginning of Prohibition in the United States. This Carter deregulation led to an increase in home brewing over the 1980s and 1990s that by the 2000s had developed into a strong craft microbrew culture in the United States, with 3,418 micro breweries, brewpubs, and regional craft breweries in the United States by the end of 2014. Carter with King Hussein of Jordan and Shah of Iran in 1977 Carter, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Zbigniew Brzezinski in September 1978 Carter with King Khalid of Saudi Arabia in October 1978 Healthcare During his presidential campaign, Carter embraced healthcare reform akin to the Ted Kennedysponsored bipartisan universal national health insurance. Carters proposals on healthcare while in office included an April 1977 mandatory health care cost proposal, and a June 1979 proposal that provided private health insurance coverage. Carter saw the June 1979 proposal as a continuation of progress in American health coverage made by President Harry Truman in the latters proposed access to quality health care being a basic right to Americans and Medicare and Medicaid being introduced under President Lyndon B. Johnson.National Health Plan Remarks Announcing Proposed Legislation. National Health Plan Message to the Congress on Proposed Legislation. During 1978, Carter also conducted meetings with Kennedy for a compromise healthcare law that proved unsuccessful. Education Early into his term, Carter collaborated with Congress to assist in fulfilling a campaign promise to create a cabinet level education department. In a February 28, 1978 address at the White House, Carter argued, Education is far too important a matter to be scattered piecemeal among various Government departments and agencies, which are often busy with sometimes dominant concerns.Elementary and Secondary Education Remarks Announcing the Administrations Proposals to the Congress. On February 8, 1979, the Carter administration released an outline of its plan to establish an education department and asserted enough support for the enactment to occur by June. On October 17, 1979, Carter signed the Department of Education Organization Act into law,Department of Education Organization Act Statement on Signing S. 210 Into Law. establishing the United States Department of Education. Carter expanded the Head Start program with the addition of 43,000 children and families, while the percentage of nondefense dollars spent on education was doubled. Carter was complimentary of the presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson and the 89th United States Congress for having initiated Head Start.15th Anniversary of Project Head Start Remarks at a White House Reception. In a November 1, 1980 speech, Carter stated his administration had extended Head Start to migrant children and was working hard right now with Senator Bentsen and with Kika de la Garza to make as much as 45 million available in Federal money in the border districts to help with the increase in school construction for the number of Mexican school children who reside here legally.Brownsville, Texas Remarks at a Rally With Area Residents. Foreign policy Iran On November 15, 1977, Carter pledged his administration would continue positive relations between the US and Iran, calling its contemporary status strong, stable and progressive. Iran hostage crisis On November 4, 1979 a group of Iranian students, belonging to the Muslim Student Followers of the Imams Line, who were supporting the Iranian Revolution, took over the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. Fiftytwo American diplomats and citizens were held hostage for the next 444 days until January 20, 1981. During the crisis, Carter remained in isolation in the White House for more than 100 days, until he left to participate in the lighting of the National Menorah on the Ellipse.Jonathan D. Sarna, How Hanukkah Came To The White House. Forward, December 2, 2009. On April 7, 1980, Carter issued Executive Order 12205, imposing economic sanctions against IranExecutive Order 12205 Economic Sanctions Against Iran and announced further measures being taken by members of his cabinet and the American government that he deemed necessary to ensure a safe release.Sanctions Against Iran Remarks Announcing U.S. Actions. On April 24, 1980, Carter ordered Operation Eagle Claw to try free the hostages. The mission failed, leaving eight American servicemen dead and causing the destruction of two aircraft.Address to the Nation on the Rescue Attempt for American Hostages in Iran Rescue Attempt for American Hostages in Iran White House Statement. Soviet Union On February 8, 1977, Carter stated he had urged the Soviet Union to align with the US in forming a comprehensive test ban to stop all nuclear testing for at least an extended period of time and that he was in favor of the Soviet Union ceasing deployment of the RSD10 Pioneer.The Presidents News Conference On June 13, 1977, during a news conference, Carter reported that the US would beginning this week to work closely with the Soviet Union on a comprehensive test ban treaty to prohibit all testing of nuclear devices underground or in the atmosphere and Paul Warnke would negotiate demilitarization of the Indian Ocean with the Soviet Union beginning the following week.The Presidents News Conference During a December 30, 1977 news conference, Carter said throughout the period of the last few months, the United States and the Soviet Union have made great progress in dealing with a long list of important issues, the most important of which is to control the deployment of strategic nuclear weapons and that the two countries sought to conclude SALT II talks by the spring of the following year.The Presidents News Conference In the 1980 State of the Union Address, Carter emphasized the significance of relations between the two regions Now, as during the last 3 12 decades, the relationship between our country, the United States of America, and the Soviet Union is the most critical factor in determining whether the world will live at peace or be engulfed in global conflict.The State of the Union Address Delivered Before a Joint Session of the Congress. Soviet invasion of Afghanistan Communists under the leadership of Nur Muhammad Taraki seized power in Afghanistan on April 27, 1978. The new regime which was divided between Tarakis extremist Khalq faction and the more moderate Parcham signed a treaty of friendship with the Soviet Union in December of that year. Tarakis efforts to improve secular education and redistribute land were accompanied by mass executions and political oppression unprecedented in Afghan history, igniting a revolt by mujahideen rebels. Following a general uprising in April 1979, Taraki was deposed by Khalq rival Hafizullah Amin in September. Amin was considered a brutal psychopath by foreign observers even the Soviets were alarmed by the brutality of the Afghan communists, and suspected Amin of being an agent of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency , although that was not the case. By December, Amins government had lost control of much of the country, prompting the Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan, execute Amin, and install Parcham leader Babrak Karmal as president. Carter was surprised by the invasion, as the consensus of the U.S. intelligence community during 1978 and 1979 reiterated as late as September 29, 1979 was that Moscow would not intervene in force even if it appeared likely that the Khalq government was about to collapse. Indeed, Carters diary entries from November 1979 until the Soviet invasion in late December contain only two short references to Afghanistan, and are instead preoccupied with the ongoing hostage crisis in Iran. In the West, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was considered a threat to global security and the oil supplies of the Persian Gulf. Moreover, the failure to accurately predict Soviet intentions caused American officials to reappraise the Soviet threat to both Iran and Pakistan, although it is now known that those fears were overblown. For example, U.S. intelligence closely followed Soviet exercises for an invasion of Iran throughout 1980, while an earlier warning from Carters national security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski that if the Soviets came to dominate Afghanistan, they could promote a separate Baluchistan... thus dismembering Pakistan and Iran took on new urgency. These concerns were a major factor in the unrequited efforts of both the Carter and Reagan administrations to improve relations with Iran, and resulted in massive aid to Pakistans Muhammad ZiaulHaq. Zias ties with the U.S. had been strained during Carters presidency due to Pakistans nuclear program and the execution of Ali Bhutto in April 1979, but Carter told Brzezinski and secretary of state Cyrus Vance as early as January 1979 that it was vital to repair our relationships with Pakistan in light of the unrest in Iran. One initiative Carter authorized to achieve this goal was a collaboration between the CIA and Pakistans InterServices Intelligence through the ISI, the CIA began providing some 500,000 worth of nonlethal assistance to the mujahideen on July 3, 1979 several months prior to the Soviet invasion. The modest scope of this early collaboration was likely influenced by the understanding, later recounted by CIA official Robert Gates, that a substantial U.S. covert aid program might have raised the stakes thereby causing the Soviets to intervene more directly and vigorously than otherwise intended. When asked whether he expected that the revelations in his memoir would inspire a mindbending number of conspiracy theories which adamantly and wrongly accuse the Carter Administration of luring the Soviets into Afghanistan, Gates replied No, because there was no basis in fact for an allegation the administration tried to draw the Soviets into Afghanistan militarily. See Gates, email communication with John Bernell White Jr., October 15, 2011, as cited in cf. In the aftermath of the invasion, Carter was determined to respond vigorously to what he considered a dangerous provocation. In a televised speech, he announced sanctions on the Soviet Union, promised renewed aid to Pakistan, initiated renewed registration for the Selective Service System, and committed the U.S. to the Persian Gulfs defense. Carter also called for a boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, which raised a bitter controversy. British prime minister Margaret Thatcher enthusiastically backed Carters tough stance, although British intelligence believed the CIA was being too alarmist about the Soviet threat to Pakistan. The thrust of U.S. policy for the duration of the war was determined by Carter in early 1980 Carter initiated a program to arm the mujahideen through Pakistans ISI and secured a pledge from Saudi Arabia to match U.S. funding for this purpose. U.S. support for the mujahideen accelerated under Carters successor, Ronald Reagan, at a final cost to U.S. taxpayers of some 3 billion. The Soviets were unable to quell the insurgency and withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989, precipitating the dissolution of the Soviet Union itself. However, the decision to route U.S. aid through Pakistan led to massive fraud, as weapons sent to Karachi were frequently sold on the local market rather than delivered to the Afghan rebels Karachi soon became one of the most violent cities in the world. Pakistan also controlled which rebels received assistance Of the seven mujahideen groups supported by Zias government, four espoused Islamic fundamentalist beliefs and these fundamentalists received most of the funding. Despite this, Carter has expressed no regrets over his decision to support what he still considers the freedom fighters in Afghanistan. South Korea During a March 9, 1977 news conference, Carter reaffirmed his interest in having a gradual withdrawal of American troops from South Korea and stated he wanted South Korea to eventually have adequate ground forces owned by and controlled by the South Korean Government to protect themselves against any intrusion from North Korea.The Presidents News Conference On May 26, 1977, during a news conference, Carter said he believed South Korea would be able to defend themselves despite reduced American troops in the event of conflict. On April 21, 1978, Carter announced a reduction in American troops in South Korea scheduled to be released by the end of the year by twothirds, citing a lack of action by Congress in regards to a compensatory aid package for the Seoul Government. From June 30 to July 1, 1977, Carter held meetings with President of South Korea Park Chunghee at the Blue House for a discussion on relations between the US and Korea as well as Carters interest in preserving his policy of worldwide tension reduction.Seoul, Republic of Korea Joint Communiqu9 Issued at the Conclusion of Meetings With President Park. International trips Countries visited by Carter during his presidency. Carter made twelve international trips to twentyfive countries during his presidency. Carter was the first president to make a state visit to SubSaharan Africa when he went to Nigeria in 1978. His travel also included trips to Europe, Asia, and Latin America. He made several trips to the Middle East to broker peace negotiations. His December 31, 1977 January 1, 1978 visit to Iran took place less than a year before the overthrow of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. 1980 presidential campaign The electoral map of the 1980 election Carter later wrote that the most intense and mounting opposition to his policies came from the liberal wing of the Democratic Party, which he attributed to Ted Kennedys ambition to replace him as president. After Kennedy announced his candidacy in November 1979, questions regarding the latters activities during his presidential bid were a frequency of Carters press conferences held during the Democratic presidential primary.The Presidents News Conference The Presidents News Conference Kennedy surprised his supporters by running a weak campaign, and Carter won most of the primaries and secured renomination. However, Kennedy had mobilized the liberal wing of the Democratic Party, which gave Carter weak support in the fall election. Carter and Vice President Mondale were formally nominated at the Democratic National Convention in New York City,Remarks Accepting the Presidential Nomination at the 1980 Democratic National Convention in New York delivering a speech notable for its tribute to the late Hubert Humphrey, who he initially called Hubert Horatio Hornblower. Carters campaign for reelection in 1980 was one of the most difficult, and least successful, in history. He faced strong challenges from the right , the center , and the left . He had to run against his own stagflationridden economy, while the hostage crisis in Iran dominated the news every week. He alienated liberal college students, who were expected to be his base, by reinstating registration for the military draft. His campaign manager and former appointments secretary, Timothy Kraft, stepped down some five weeks before the general election amid what turned out to have been an uncorroborated allegation of cocaine use. On October 28, Carter and Reagan participated in the sole presidential debate of the election cycle.Presidential Debate in Cleveland Though initially trailing Carter by several points, Reagan experienced a surge in polling following the debate. Carter was defeated by Ronald Reagan in a landslide, and the Senate went Republican for the first time since 1952. In his concession speech, Carter admitted that he was hurt by the outcome of the election but pledged a very fine transition period with Presidentelect Reagan.1980 Presidential Election Remarks on the Outcome of the Election Postpresidency Shortly after losing his reelection bid, Carter told the White House press corp of his intent to emulate the retirement of Harry S. Truman and not use his subsequent public life to enrich himself. Carter Center In 1982, Carter founded the Carter Center, a nongovernmental and nonprofit organization with the purpose of advancing human rights and alleviating human suffering, including helping improve the quality of life for people in more than 80 countries. Diplomacy In 1994, President Bill Clinton sought Carters assistance in a North Korea peace mission,Marion V. Creekmore, A Moment of Crisis Jimmy Carter, The Power of a Peacemaker, and North Koreas Nuclear Ambitions . during which Carter negotiated an understanding with Kim Ilsung, who he went on to outline a treaty with that he announced to CNN without the consent of the Clinton administration to spur American action. Carter traveled to North Korea to secure the release of Aijalon Gomes in August 2010, successfully negotiating his release.CNN Wire Staff . Freed American Arrives Home from North Korea CNN. Retrieved September 28, 2010. Throughout the latter part of 2017, as tensions between the US and North Korea persisted, Carter recommended a peace treaty between the two nations, and confirmed he had offered himself to the Trump administration as a willing candidate to serve as diplomatic envoy to North Korea. In October 1984, Carter was named an honorary citizen of Peru by Mayor of Cusco Daniel Estrada after traveling to Machu Picchu, Carter endorsing the countrys elections in 2001, and offering support to the Peruvian government following a meeting with President of Peru Alan Garcia at Government Palace in Lima in April 2009. In his February 1986 talks with Toms Borge, Carter secured the release of journalist Luis Mora and labor leader Jose Altamirano, while touring Nicaragua for three days. Carter conducted a tour of Cuba in May 2002 that included meeting with Fidel CastroCarter Center News, July December 2002. Retrieved August 4, 2008. and meeting political dissidents such as the AIDS sanitarium, a medical school, a biotech facility, an agricultural production cooperative, and a school for disabled children.BBC News, Lift Cuba embargo, Carter tells US, May 15, 2002. Retrieved August 4, 2008. Carter toured Cuba again for three days in March 2011. Carters diplomatic efforts in the Middle East included a September 1981 meeting with Prime Minister of Israel Menachem Begin, a March 1983 tour of Egypt that included meeting with members of the Palestine Liberation Organization, a December 2008 meeting with Syrian President Bashar alAssad,Jimmy Carter speaks to Forward Magazine . and a June 2012 call with Jeffery Brown in which Carter stressed Egyptian military generals could be granted full power executively and legislatively in addition to being able to form a new constitution in favor of themselves in the event their announced intentions went through. In 2006, Carter stated his disagreements with the domestic and foreign policies of Israel while saying he was in favor of the country, extending his criticisms to Israels policies in Lebanon, the West Bank, and Gaza.Douglas G. Brinkley. The Unfinished Presidency Jimmy Carters Journey to the Nobel Peace Prize , pp. 99 123.Kenneth W. Stein, My Problem with Jimmy Carters Book, Middle East Quarterly 14.2 . Carter traveled to Syria in April 2008,Jimmy Carter Planning to meet Mashaal , The Jerusalem Post , April 9, 2008. laying a wreath at the grave of Yasser Arafat in RamallahPA to Carter Dont meet with Mashaal . Associated Press. April 15, 2008. and denying he had been contacted by the Bush administration in relation to meeting with Hamas leaders.Carter Rice did not advise against Hamas meeting. CNN. April 23, 2008. In July 2007, Carter joined Nelson Mandela in Johannesburg, South Africa, to announce his participation in The Elders, a group of independent global leaders who work together on peace and human rights issues. Following the announcement, Carter participated in visits to Darfur, Sudan, Cyprus, the Korean Peninsula, and the Middle East, among others. Carter attempted traveling to Zimbabwe in November 2008, but was stopped by President Robert Mugabes government. Carter held summits in Egypt and Tunisia in 1995 1996 to address violence in the Great Lakes region of Africa,Press Release, African Leaders Gather to Address Great Lakes Crisis , May 2, 1996. Retrieved August 4, 2008. and played a key role in negotiation of the Nairobi Agreement in 1999 between Sudan and Uganda.The Nairobi Agreement , December 8, 1999. Retrieved August 4, 2008. Criticism of American policy Carter began his first year out of office with a pledge to not critique the new Reagan administration, speaking out after the assassination attempt on Reagan, and voicing his agreement with Reagan on building neutron arms in the wake of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and later disagreement with Reagans handing of the Middle East. The following year, Carter called for bipartisanship to fix American economic issues, and criticized the Reagan administrations handling of the Sabra and Shatila massacre. Carter responded favorably to Reagan choosing to remain within the Camp David agreement, with distaste toward what he felt was Reagan blaming his tenure for continued difficulties in policy. In 1983, Carter judged the Reagan campaign with having falsified simplicity in solving issues, and criticized Reagan for a lack of attention to human rights violations. In 1984, Carter stated he had been wrongly presented as weak by Reagan due to a commitment to human rights during the previous presidential election, and condemned Reagan for not making rescue efforts to retrieve four American businessmen from West Beirut. In 1985, Carter rebuked Reagan over his handling of peace within the Middle East, his support of the Strategic Defense Initiative, and Reagans claim of an international conspiracy on terrorism. Carters insistence that Reagan was not preserving peace in the Middle East continued in 1987, Carter during the year also criticizing Reagan for adhering to terrorist demands, nomination of Robert Bork for the Supreme Court, and handling of the Persian Gulf. During the presidency of George W. Bush, Carter stated his opposition to the Iraq War,Jimmy Carter, Just War or a Just War, The New York Times , March 9, 2003. Retrieved August 4, 2008. and what he considered an attempt on the part of Bush and Tony Blair to oust Saddam Hussein through the usage of lies and misinterpretations. In May 2007, Carter stated the Bush administration has been the worst in history in terms of its impact in foreign affairs,Frank Lockwood, Carter calls Bush administration worst ever, Arkansas DemocratGazette , May 19, 2007. Retrieved August 4, 2008. and later stated he was just comparing Bushs tenure to that of Richard Nixon. Carters comments received a response from the Bush administration in the form of Tony Fratto saying Carter was increasing his irrelevance with his commentary. By the end of Bushs second term, Carter considered Bushs tenure disappointing, which he disclosed in comments to Forward Magazine of Syria. Though praising of President Obama in the early part of his tenure, Carter stated his disagreements with the use of drone strikes against suspected terrorists, Obamas choice to keep Guantnamo Bay detention camp open, ABC quotes came from a NY Times June 25, 2012 oped written by Carter and the current federal surveillance programs as disclosed by Edward Snowden indicating that America has no functioning democracy at this moment. During the Trump presidency, Carter spoke favorably of the chance for immigration reform through Congress, and criticized Trump for his handling of the U.S. national anthem protests. Presidential politics Carter was considered a potential candidate in the 1984 presidential election, but did not run and instead endorsed Walter Mondale for the Democratic nomination. After Mondale secured the nomination, Carter critiqued the Reagan campaign, spoke at the 1984 Democratic National Convention, and advised Mondale. Following the election, in which President Reagan defeated Mondale, Carter stated the loss was predictable due to the latters platform including raising taxes. In the 1988 presidential election cycle, Carter ruled himself out as a candidate once more and predicted Vice President George H. W. Bush as the Republican nominee in the general election. Carter foresaw unity at the 1988 Democratic National Convention, where he delivered an address. Following the election, a failed attempt by the Democrats in regaining the White House, Carter said Bush would have a more difficult presidency than Reagan due to not having the same level of popularity. During the 1992 presidential election, Carter met with Massachusetts Senator Paul Tsongas who sought out his advice. Carter spoke favorably of former Governor of Arkansas Bill Clinton, and criticized Ross Perot. As the primary concluded, Carter spoke of the need for the 1992 Democratic National Convention to address certain issues not focused on in the past, and campaigned for Clinton after he became the Democratic nominee in the general election, publicly stating his expectation to be consulted during the latters presidency. Carter endorsed Vice President Al Gore days before the 2000 presidential election, and in the years following voiced his opinion that the election was won by Gore, despite the Supreme Court handing the election to Bush in the controversial Bush v. Gore ruling. In the 2004 election cycle, Carter endorsed John Kerry and spoke at the 2004 Democratic National Convention. Carter also voiced concerns of another voting mishap in the state of Florida. Amid the Democratic presidential primary in 2008, Carter was speculated to endorse Senator Barack Obama over his main primary rival, Hillary Clinton amid his speaking favorably of the candidate as well as remarks from the Carter family that showed their support for Obama. Carter also commented on Clinton ending her bid when superdelegates voted after the June 3 primary. Leading up to the general election, Carter criticized John McCain, who responded to Carters comments, and warned Obama against selecting Clinton as his running mate.Carter endorsed Republican Mitt Romney during the primary season of the 2012 election cycle, though he clarified his backing of Romney was due to him considering the former Massachusetts governor the candidate that could best assure a victory for President Obama.Yahoo News, Jimmy Carter wants Mitt Romney to be the Republican nominee, September 16, 2011. Retrieved October 5, 2011. Carter delivered a videotape address at the 2012 Democratic National Convention. Carter was critical of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump shortly after the latter entered the primary and predicted he would lose, noting the differing circumstances of the political climate from when he was still an active politician. As the primary continued, Carter stated he would prefer Trump over his main rival Ted Cruz, though rebuked the Trump campaign in remarks during the primary, and in his address to the 2016 Democratic National Convention. In the Democratic primary, Carter voted for Senator Bernie Sanders, and in the general election, voted for Hillary Clinton. Hurricane relief Carter criticized the Bush administrations handling of Hurricane Katrina, built homes in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, and partnered with former presidents to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities, in addition to writing opeds about the goodness seen in Americans who assist each other during natural disasters. Other activities Carter attended the dedication of his presidential library and those of Presidents Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush. Carter delivered eulogies at the funerals of Coretta Scott King and Gerald Ford.President Jimmy Carters Eulogy for President Ford Carter serves as an Honorary Chair for the World Justice Project, and formerly served as one on the Continuity of Government Commission from 2003 to 2011. Personal views Abortion Although Carter was personally opposed to abortion, he supported legalized abortion after the landmark US Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade , 410 US 113 . As president, he did not support increased federal funding for abortion services. He was criticized by the American Civil Liberties Union for not doing enough to find alternatives. In a March 29, 2012 interview with Laura Ingraham, Carter expressed his current view of abortion and his wish to see the Democratic Party becoming more prolife Death penalty Carter is known for his strong opposition to the death penalty, which he expressed during his presidential campaigns, as had George McGovern. Two successive nominees, Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis, also opposed the death penalty.Democrats shift on death penalty, Boston Globe , December 7, 2003 In his Nobel Prize lecture, Carter urged prohibition of the death penalty.Carter Nobel Peace Prize speech , CNN, December 10, 2002 He has continued to speak out against the death penalty in the US and abroad. In a letter to the Governor of New Mexico, Bill Richardson, Carter urged the governor to sign a bill to eliminate the death penalty and institute life in prison without parole instead. New Mexico abolished the death penalty in 2009. Carter wrote As you know, the United States is one of the few countries, along with nations such as Saudi Arabia, China, and Cuba, which still carry out the death penalty despite the ongoing tragedy of wrongful conviction and gross racial and classbased disparities that make impossible the fair implementation of this ultimate punishment. In 2012, Carter wrote an oped in the LA Times supporting passage of a state referendum which would have ended the death penalty. He opened the article The process for administering the death penalty in the United States is broken beyond repair, and it is time to choose a more effective and moral alternative. California voters will have the opportunity to do this on election day.Carter, Jimmy, Jimmy Carter to California Yes on Prop. 34 , LA Times , October 28, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2013. Carter has also called for commutations of death sentences for many deathrow inmates, including Brian K. Baldwin , Kenneth Foster and Troy Anthony Davis . Equality for women In October 2000, Carter, a thirdgeneration Southern Baptist, announced that he was severing connections to the Southern Baptist Convention over its opposition to women as pastors. What led Carter to take this action was a doctrinal statement by the Convention, adopted in June 2000, advocating a literal interpretation of the Bible. This statement followed a position of the Convention two years previously advocating the submission of wives to their husbands. Carter described the reason for his decision as due to an increasing inclination on the part of Southern Baptist Convention leaders to be more rigid on what is a Southern Baptist and exclusionary of accommodating those who differ from them. The New York Times called Carters action the highestprofile defection yet from the Southern Baptist Convention. In subsequent years, Carter has joined with other world leaders who have spoken out about the subjugation of women by religious and other institutions. On July 15, 2009, Carter wrote an opinion piece about equality for women in which he stated that he chooses equality for women over the dictates of the leadership of what has been a lifetime religious commitment. He said that the view that women are inferior is not confined to one faith, nor, tragically does its influence stop at the walls of the church, mosque, synagogue or temple. Carter stated In 2014, he published A Call to Action Women, Religion, Violence, and Power . Gun control Carter has publicly expressed support for a ban on assault weapons and background checks of gun buyers. In May 1994, Carter and former presidents Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan wrote to the U.S. House of Representatives in support of banning semiautomatic assault guns. In a February 2013 appearance on Piers Morgan Tonight , Carter agreed that if the assault weapons ban did not pass it would be mainly due to lobbying by the National Rifle Association and its pressure on weakkneed politicians. Samesex marriage Carter has stated that he supports samesex marriage in civil ceremonies. He has also stated that he believes Jesus would also support it, saying I believe Jesus would. I dont have any verse in scripture. ... I believe Jesus would approve gay marriage, but thats just my own personal belief. I think Jesus would encourage any love affair if it was honest and sincere and was not damaging to anyone else, and I dont see that gay marriage damages anyone else.Buxton, Ryan, July 7, 2015, Jimmy Carter Says Jesus Would Approve Of Gay Marriage . Carter Sadly Turns Back On National Baptist Body. The New York Times . Retrieved on March 31, 2013. In 2000, Carter severed his membership with the Southern Baptist Convention, saying the groups doctrines did not align with his Christian beliefs. In April 2006, Carter, former President Bill Clinton, and Mercer University President Bill Underwood initiated the New Baptist Covenant. The broadly inclusive movement seeks to unite Baptists of all races, cultures and convention affiliations. Eighteen Baptist leaders representing more than 20million Baptists across North America backed the group as an alternative to the Southern Baptist Convention. The group held its first meeting in Atlanta, January 30 through February 1, 2008.New Baptist Covenant. Retrieved August 4, 2008. Family Carter had three younger siblings, all of whom died of pancreatic cancer sisters Gloria Carter Spann and Ruth Carter Stapleton , and brother Billy Carter . He was first cousin to politician Hugh Carter and a distant cousin to the Carter family of musicians.Cash, John R. with Patrick Carr . Johnny Cash, the Autobiography . Harper Collins. Farah Pahlavi, Empress of Iran, holds Jimmy Carter IV while Rosalynn Carter, Caron Carter and Chip Carter watch, January 1978 Carter and Rosalynn Smith were married in July 1946. They have three sons, one daughter, eight grandsons, three granddaughters, and two greatgrandsons. They celebrated their 70th wedding anniversary in July 2016, making them the secondlongest wed Presidential couple after George and Barbara Bush. Their eldest son Jack Carter was the 2006 Democratic candidate for U.S. Senate in Nevada before losing to the Republican incumbent, John Ensign. Carters grandson Jason Carter is a former Georgia State Senator and in 2014 was the Democratic candidate for governor of Georgia, losing to the Republican incumbent, Nathan Deal. On December 20, 2015, while teaching a Sunday school class, Carter announced that his 28yearold grandson Jeremy Carter had died from an unspecified illness. Cancer diagnosis On August 3, 2015, Carter underwent elective surgery to remove a small mass on his liver, and his prognosis for a full recovery was initially said to be excellent. On August 12, however, Carter announced he had been diagnosed with cancer that had metastasized, without specifying where the cancer had originated. On August 20, he disclosed that melanoma had been found in his brain and liver, and that he had begun treatment with the immunotherapy drug pembrolizumab and was about to start radiation therapy. His healthcare is being managed by Emory Healthcare of Atlanta. The former President has an extensive family history of cancer, including both of his parents and all three of his siblings. On December 6, 2015, Carter issued a statement that his medical scans no longer showed any cancer. On January 20, 2017, at age 92, Carter became the oldest president to attend a presidential inauguration. Funeral and burial plans Carter has planned to be buried in front of his home in Plains, Georgia. Carter noted in 2006 that a funeral in Washington, D.C., with visitation at the Carter Center was planned as well.Associated Press, President Carter Talks of Funeral Plans, December 4, 2006. Retrieved February 11, 2017. Public image and legacy Public opinion In the wake of Nixons Watergate Scandal, exit polls from the 1976 Presidential election suggested that many still held Gerald Fords pardon of Nixon against him. By comparison Carter was a sincere, honest, and wellmeaning Southerner. Carter began his term with a 66percent approval rating which had dropped to 34percent approval by the time he left office, with 55percent disapproving. In the 1980 campaign, former California Governor Ronald Reagan projected an easy selfconfidence, in contrast to Carters serious and introspective temperament. What many people believed to be Carters personal attention to detail, his pessimistic attitude, his seeming indecisiveness and weakness with people were accentuated in contrast to what many people believed, Reagans charismatic charm and delegation of tasks to subordinates. Reagan used the economic problems, Iran hostage crisis, and lack of Washington cooperation to portray Carter as a weak and ineffectual leader. Like his immediate predecessor, Gerald Ford, Carter did not serve a second term as president. Among those who were elected as president, Carter was the first since Hoover in 1932 to lose a reelection bid. Carters postPresidency activities have been favorably received. The Independent wrote, Carter is widely considered a better man than he was a president. His presidential approval rating was just 31percent immediately before the 1980 election, but 64 percent approved of his performance as president in a 2009 poll. Legacy Carters presidency was initially viewed by some as a failure. In historical rankings of U.S. presidents, the Carter presidency has ranged from No. 19 to No. 34. Although his presidency received mixed reception, his peacekeeping and humanitarian efforts since he left office have made Carter renowned as one of the most successful exPresidents in American history. The documentary Back Door Channels The Price of Peace credits Carters efforts at Camp David, which brought peace between Israel and Egypt, with bringing the only meaningful peace to the Middle East. The film opened the 2009 MonteCarlo Television Festival in an invitationonly royal screening on June 7, 2009 at the Grimaldi Forum in the presence of Albert II, Prince of Monaco. Honors and awards Carter has received numerous awards and accolades since his presidency, and several institutions and locations have been named in his honor. His presidential library, Jimmy Carter Library and Museum was opened in 1986. In 1998, the U.S. Navy named the third and last Seawolf class submarine honoring former President Carter and his service as a submariner officer. It became one of the few Navy vessels to be named for a person living at the time of naming. That year he also received the United Nations Human Rights Prize, given in honor of human rights achievements, and the Hoover Medal, recognizing engineers who have contributed to global causes. He won the 2002 Nobel Peace Prize, which was partially a response to President George W. Bushs threats of war against Iraq and Carters criticism of the Bush administration. Carter has been nominated seven times for the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for audio recordings of his books, and has won twice for Our Endangered Values Americas Moral Crisis and A Full Life Reflections at 90 . Judy Kurtz, Jimmy Carter up for another Grammy, The Hill . The Souther Field Airport in Americus, Georgia was renamed Jimmy Carter Regional Airport in 2009. Historical Significance With President Carter turning 93 on October 1, 2017, four successive presidents, Ford , Carter , Reagan and George Herbert Walker Bush have reached the age of 93, a historic first. Previously, Presidents John Adams and Herbert Hoover had been the only Presidents to reach the age of 90, the previous record for Presidential longevity. If he lives to March 16, 2018, he will become the second longest lived President in United States history after George H. W. Bush at 93 years, 166 days, surpassing Gerald Ford who holds the current record at 93 years, and 165 days when he died on December 26, 2006. FileFORPRES.jpgCarter , walks with, from left, George H. W. Bush, George W. Bush, and Bill Clinton during the dedication of the William J. Clinton Presidential Center and Park in Little Rock, Arkansas on November 18, 2004 FileDIG13605028.jpgCarter during a Google Hangout session held during the LBJ Presidential Library Civil Rights Summit in 2014 FilePresidents Obama, Clinton, and Carter.jpgCarter with President Barack Obama and Bill Clinton on August 28, 2013, the 50th anniversary of the March on Washington FileJimmy Carter with model of SSN23.jpgCarter with a replica of the USS Jimmy Carter with Secretary of the Navy John H. Dalton at a naming ceremony, April 28, 1998 See also Electoral history of Jimmy Carter History of the United States History of the United States List of peace activists Jimmy Carter rabbit incident Americo Makk portrait Hawaii Gift of State. Mush From the Wimp incident Raymond Lee Harvey, assassination conspirator List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience Notes References Further reading Primary sources External links Official White House biography Jimmy Carter Presidential Library Museum Jimmy Carter National Historic Site Organizations The Carter Center Books and movies Interviews, speeches and statements Full audio of a number of Carter speeches at the Miller Center of Public Affairs Oral History Interview with Jimmy Carter at the Southern Oral History Program Carter Nobel lecture, Oslo, Norway Life Portrait of Jimmy Carter, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , December 3, 1999 Media coverage Other Essays and information on Jimmy Carter, each member of his cabinet and the First Lady Miller Center of Public Affairs The Presidents Jimmy Carter , an American Experience documentary Category1924 births CategoryLiving people CategoryPresidents of the United States Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury Baptists Category21stcentury American novelists Category21stcentury Baptists CategoryAmerican democracy activists CategoryAmerican diplomats CategoryAmerican gun control advocates CategoryAmerican humanitarians CategoryAmerican male novelists CategoryAmerican memoirists CategoryAmerican military personnel of World War II CategoryAmerican Nobel laureates CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryAmerican political writers CategoryBaptists from the United States CategoryCancer survivors CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party state governors of the United States CategoryEmory University faculty CategoryFarmers from Georgia CategoryGeorgia Democrats CategoryGeorgia State Senators CategoryGeorgia Institute of Technology alumni CategoryGeorgia Southwestern State University alumni CategoryGovernors of Georgia CategoryGrammy Award winners CategoryHabitat for Humanity people CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryIran hostage crisis CategoryMilitary personnel from Georgia CategoryNobel Peace Prize laureates CategoryPeople from Plains, Georgia CategoryPeople of the Iranian Revolution CategoryPeople of the Soviet Afghan War CategoryPresidential Medal of Freedom recipients CategoryRecipients of the Indira Gandhi Peace Prize CategorySchool board members in Georgia CategorySons of the American Revolution CategorySubmariners CategoryUnion College alumni CategoryUnited States Naval Academy alumni CategoryUnited States Navy officers CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1976 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1980 CategoryWriters from Georgia CategoryPhi KappaPhi
James Madison Jr. was an American statesman and Founding Father who served as the fourth President of the United States from 1809 to 1817. He is hailed as the Father of the Constitution for his pivotal role in drafting and promoting the United States Constitution and the Bill of Rights. Madison inherited his plantation Montpelier in Virginia and owned hundreds of slaves during his lifetime. He served as both a member of the Virginia House of Delegates and as a member of the Continental Congress prior to the Constitutional Convention. After the Convention, he became one of the leaders in the movement to ratify the Constitution, both in Virginia and nationally. His collaboration with Alexander Hamilton and John Jay produced The Federalist Papers , among the most important treatises in support of the Constitution. Madisons political views changed throughout his life. During deliberations on the Constitution, he favored a strong national government, but later preferred stronger state governments, before settling between the two extremes later in his life. In 1789, Madison became a leader in the new House of Representatives, drafting many general laws. He is noted for drafting the first ten amendments to the Constitution, and thus is known also as the Father of the Bill of Rights. He worked closely with President George Washington to organize the new federal government. Breaking with Hamilton and the Federalist Party in 1791, he and Thomas Jefferson organized the DemocraticRepublican Party. In response to the Alien and Sedition Acts, Jefferson and Madison drafted the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, arguing that states can nullify unconstitutional laws. As Jeffersons Secretary of State , Madison supervised the Louisiana Purchase, which doubled the nations size. Madison succeeded Jefferson as president in 1809, was reelected in 1812, and presided over renewed prosperity for several years. After the failure of diplomatic protests and a trade embargo against the United Kingdom, he led the U.S. into the War of 1812. The war was an administrative morass, as the United States had neither a strong army nor financial system. As a result, Madison afterward supported a stronger national government and military, as well as the national bank, which he had long opposed. Madison has been ranked in the aggregate by historians as the ninth most successful president. Early life and education James Madison Jr. was born on March 16, 1751, at Belle Grove Plantation near Port Conway, Virginia, to father James Madison Sr. and mother Nelly Conway Madison. He grew up as the oldest of twelve children, with seven brothers and four sisters. Three of James Jr.s brothers died as infants, including one who was stillborn. In the summer of 1775, his sister Elizabeth and his brother Reuben died from a dysentery epidemic that swept through Orange County because of contaminated water.. His father, James Madison Sr. , was a tobacco planter who grew up on a plantation, then called Mount Pleasant, which he had inherited upon reaching adulthood. He later acquired more property and slaves, and with , he became the largest landowner and a leading citizen in the Piedmont. James Jr.s mother, Nelly Conway Madison , was born at Port Conway, the daughter of a prominent planter and tobacco merchant.. In these years, the southern colonies were becoming a slave society, in which slave labor powered the economy and slaveholders formed the political elite. From age 11 to 16, young Jemmy Madison was sent to study under Donald Robertson, an instructor at the Innes Plantation in King and Queen County, Virginia, in the Tidewater region. Robertson was a Scottish teacher who tutored a number of prominent plantation families in the South. From Robertson, Madison learned mathematics, geography, and modern and classical languages he became especially proficient in Latin. He attributed his instinct for learning largely to that man Robertson. At age 16, he returned to Montpelier, where he began a twoyear course of study under the Reverend Thomas Martin in preparation for college. Unlike most collegebound Virginians of his day, Madison did not attend the College of William and Mary, where the lowland Williamsburg climate more susceptible to infectious disease might have strained his delicate health. Instead, in 1769, he enrolled at the College of New Jersey, now Princeton University, where he became roommates and close friends with poet Philip Freneau. Madison proposed in vain to Freneaus sister Mary. Madison at Princeton University. Portrait by James Sharples. Through diligence and long hours of study that may have compromised his health, Madison graduated in 1771. His studies included Latin, Greek, science, geography, mathematics, rhetoric, and philosophy. Great emphasis was placed on speech and debate also Madison helped found the American Whig Society, in direct competition to fellow student Aaron Burrs Cliosophic Society. After graduation, Madison remained at Princeton to study Hebrew, in which he became quite fluent, and political philosophy under the university president, John Witherspoon, before returning to Montpelier in the spring of 1772. Madison studied law from his interest in public policy rather than the intent to practice law.. Religion Although educated by Presbyterian clergymen, young Madison was an avid reader of English deist tracts. As an adult, Madison paid little attention to religious matters. Though most historians have found little indication of his religious leanings after he left college, some scholars indicate he leaned toward deism. Others maintain that Madison accepted Christian tenets and formed his outlook on life with a Christian world view.. Military service and early political career After graduation from Princeton, Madison became interested in the relationship between the American colonies and Great Britain, which deteriorated over the issue of British taxation. In 1774, Madison took a seat on the local Committee of Safety, a patriot prorevolution group that oversaw the local militia. This was the first step in a life of public service that his familys wealth facilitated. In October 1775, at the start of the American Revolutionary War, he was commissioned as the colonel of the Orange County militia, serving as his fathers secondincommand until his election as a delegate to the Fifth Virginia Convention, which produced Virginias first constitution. Congressman Madison, age 32 by Charles Willson Peale At the Virginia constitutional convention, Madison supported the Virginia Declaration of Rights, though he argued that it should contain stronger protections for freedom of religion. He had earlier witnessed the persecution of Baptist preachers in Virginia, who were arrested for preaching without a license from the established Anglican Church. He collaborated with the Baptist preacher Elijah Craig to promote constitutional guarantees for religious liberty in Virginia.. Madison and Thomas Jefferson, who became a mentor to Madison, drafted the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, which was finally passed in 1786.. Madison served on the Virginia governors Council of State from 1777 to 1779, at which point he was elected to the Congress of the Confederation. The country faced a difficult war against Great Britain, as well as runaway inflation, financial troubles, and lack of cooperation between the different levels of government. Madison worked to make himself an expert on financial issues, becoming deeply involved in congressional committees, becoming a legislative workhorse and a master of parliamentary coalition building. Frustrated by the failure of the states to supply needed requisitions, Madison proposed a standing army, a permanent navy, and the ability of Congress to compel states to meet their wartime obligations. Madison also persuaded Virginia to give up its claims to northwestern territories consisting of most of modernday Ohio and points west to the Continental Congress. After serving Congress from 1781 to 1783, Madison won election to the Virginia House of Delegates in 1784. Madison served in the Virginia House of Delegates from 1784 to 1786. During these years in the House of Delegates, Madison grew increasingly frustrated with what he saw as excessive democracy. He criticized the tendency for delegates to cater to the particular interests of their constituents, even if such interests were destructive to the state at large. In particular, he was troubled by a law that denied diplomatic immunity to ambassadors from other countries, and a law that legalized paper money. He thought legislators should be disinterested and act in the interests of their state at large, even if this contradicted the wishes of constituents. Madison believed this excessive democracy was the cause of a larger social decay which he and others thought had resumed after the revolution and was nearing a tipping point Shays Rebellion was an example. Father of the Constitution Page one of the original copyof the U.S. Constitution The Articles of Confederation established the United States as an association of sovereign states with a weak central government. This arrangement was met with disapproval, and was mostly unsuccessful after the war. Congress had no power to tax, and was unable to pay debts from the Revolution, which concerned Madison and other nationalists, such as Washington and Alexander Hamilton, who feared national bankruptcy and disunion.. The historian Gordon S. Wood has noted that many leaders, including Madison and Washington, feared more that the revolution had not fixed the social problems that had triggered it and that the excesses ascribed to the King were being seen in the state legislatures. Shays Rebellion is often cited as the event that forced the issue Wood argues that many at the time saw it as only the most extreme example of democratic excess. As Madison wrote, a crisis had arrived which was to decide whether the American experiment was to be a blessing to the world, or to blast for ever the hopes which the republican cause had inspired.. Madison initially hoped to amend the Articles of Confederation, and at the 1786 Annapolis Convention, he supported the calling of another convention to consider amending the Articles. After winning election to another term in the Congress of the Confederation, Madison helped convince the other Congressmen to authorize the Philadelphia convention for the purposes of proposing new amendments. But Madison had come to believe that the ineffectual Articles had to be superseded by a new constitution, and he began preparing for a convention that would do more than merely propose amendments. Madison was pivotal in persuading Washington to attend the 1787 convention he knew how instrumental the general would be to the adoption of a new constitution.. Years earlier Madison had pored over crates of books that Jefferson sent him from France on various forms of government. The historian Douglas Adair called Madisons work probably the most fruitful piece of scholarly research ever carried out by an American.. As a quorum was being reached for the convention to begin, the 36yearold Madison wrote what became known as the Virginia Plan, an outline for a new constitution.. Many delegates were surprised to learn that the plan called for the abrogation of the Articles and the creation of a new constitution, to be ratified by special conventions in each state rather than the state legislatures. Nonetheless, with the assent of prominent attendees such as Washington and Benjamin Franklin, the delegates went into a secret session to consider the creation of a new constitution.. Though the Virginia Plan was an outline rather than a draft of a possible constitution, and though it was extensively changed during the debate , its use at the convention led many to call Madison the Father of the Constitution.. During the course of the Convention, Madison spoke over two hundred times, and his fellow delegates rated him highly. William Pierce wrote that ... every Person seems to acknowledge his greatness. In the management of every great question he evidently took the lead in the Convention ... he always comes forward as the best informed Man of any point in debate. Madison recorded the unofficial minutes of the convention, and these have become the only comprehensive record of what occurred. The historian Clinton Rossiter regarded Madisons performance as a combination of learning, experience, purpose, and imagination that not even Adams or Jefferson could have equaled.. Gordon Wood argues Madisons frustrating experience in the Virginia legislature years earlier most shaped his constitutional views. Wood notes that the governmental structure in both the Virginia Plan and the final constitution were not innovative, since they were copied from the British government, had been used in the states since 1776, and numerous authors had already argued for their adoption at the national level.. The controversial elements in the Virginia Plan were removed, and the rest was commonly accepted as necessary for a functional government for decades, hence Madisons contribution was considered more qualitative. Wood argues that, like most national politicians of the late 1780s, Madison believed that the problem was less with the Articles of Confederation than with the nature of the state legislatures. He believed the solution was to restrain the excesses of the states. This required more than an alteration in the Articles of Confederation it required a change in the character of the national compact. The ultimate question before the convention, Wood notes, was not how to design a government but whether the states should remain sovereign, whether sovereignty should be transferred to the national government, or whether the constitution should settle somewhere in between. Those, like Madison, who thought democracy in the state legislatures was excessive and insufficiently disinterested, wanted sovereignty transferred to the national government, while those who did not think this a problem, wanted to fix the Articles of Confederation. Madison was among the few delegates who wanted to deprive the states of sovereignty completely, which he considered the only solution to the problem. Though sharing the same goal as Madison, most other delegates reacted strongly against such an extreme change to the status quo. Though Madison lost most of his battles over how to amend the Virginia Plan , in the process he increasingly shifted the debate away from a position of pure state sovereignty. Since most disagreements over what to include in the constitution were ultimately disputes over the balance of sovereignty between the states and national government, Madisons influence was critical. Wood notes that Madisons ultimate contribution was not in designing any particular constitutional framework, but in shifting the debate toward a compromise of shared sovereignty between the national and state governments.. The Federalist Papers and ratification debates Following the Constitutional Convention, there ensued an intense battle over the Constitutions ratification. Each state was requested to hold a special convention to deliberate and determine whether or not to ratify the Constitution.. Madison returned to New York, where the Confederation Congress was in session.. There he was approached by Alexander Hamilton, who asked him to help write The Federalist Papers , a series of 85 newspaper articles published in New York that explained and defended the proposed Constitution. Under the pseudonym Publius , Hamilton, Madison, and John Jay wrote 85 essays in the span of six months, with Madison writing 29 of the essays. The articles were also published in book form and became a virtual debaters handbook for the supporters of the Constitution in the ratifying conventions. Historian Clinton Rossiter called The Federalist Papers the most important work in political science that ever has been written, or is likely ever to be written, in the United States. Federalist No. 10, Madisons first contribution the papers, became highly regarded in the 20th century for its advocacy for representative democracy.. Consensus held that if Virginia, the most populous state at the time, did not ratify the Constitution, the new national government would not likely succeed. When the Virginia Ratifying Convention began on June 2, 1788, the Constitution had not yet been ratified by the required nine states. New York, the second largest state and a bastion of antifederalism, would likely not ratify it without Virginia, and Virginias exclusion from the new government would disqualify Virginian George Washington from being the first president.. Virginia delegates believed that Washingtons election as the first president was a condition for their acceptance of the new constitution and the new government. Arguably the most prominent antifederalist, the powerful orator Patrick Henry was a delegate and had a following second only to Washington . Most delegates believed that Virginians mainly opposed the constitution. Initially Madison did not want to stand for election to the Virginia ratifying convention, but was persuaded to do so because the situation looked so bad. His role at the convention was likely critical to Virginias ratification, and thus to the success of the constitution generally. Although Henry was by far the more powerful and dramatic speaker, Madison successfully matched him. Madisons expertise on the subject he had long argued for allowed him to respond with rational arguments to Henrys emotional appeals.. Madison persuaded prominent figures such as Edmund Randolph, who had refused to endorse the constitution at the convention, to change their position and support it at the ratifying convention. Randolphs switch likely changed the votes of several more antifederalists.. When the vote was nearing, and the constitution appeared headed for defeat, Madison pleaded with a small group of antifederalists, and promised them that, if they changed their votes, he would later push for a bill of rights to provide limits to the power of the new government. A resolution was proposed that a declaration of rights be referred to the other States in the American Confederation for their consideration prior to ratification of the constitution. Supported by George Mason and Patrick Henry but opposed by Madison, Henry Lee III , John Marshall, Randolph, and Bushrod Washington, the resolution failed, 88 80. Lee, Madison, Marshall, Randolph, and Washington then voted in favor of a resolution to ratify the constitution, which the convention approved on June 28, 1789 by a vote of 89 79, with Mason and Henry voting in the minority. Addressing slavery in the Constitution, Madison set out with a view that African American slaves as an unfortunate race and believed their true nature was both human and property. On February 12, 1788, Madison, in Federalist No. 54, stated that the Constitutional threefifths compromise clause was the best alternative for the slaves current condition and for determining representation of citizens in Congress. Madison believed that slaves, as property, would be protected by both their masters and the government. Madison was called the Father of the Constitution by his peers in his lifetime. However, he was modest, and he protested the title as being a credit to which I have no claim. ... The Constitution was not, like the fabled Goddess of Wisdom, the offspring of a single brain. It ought to be regarded as the work of many heads and many hands. He wrote Hamilton at the New York ratifying convention, stating his opinion that ratification was in toto and for ever. Member of Congress After Virginia ratified the constitution, Madison returned to New York to resume his duties in the Congress of the Confederation. At the request of Washington, Madison sought a seat in the United States Senate, but his election was blocked by Patrick Henry. Madison then decided to run for a seat in the United States House of Representatives. At Henrys behest, the Virginia legislature created congressional districts designed to deny Madison a seat, and Henry recruited a strong challenger to Madison in James Monroe. Locked in a difficult race against Monroe, Madison promised to support a series of constitutional amendments to protect individual liberties.. Madisons promise paid off, as he won election to Congress with 57 of the vote.. He would continue to serve in the House until 1797, when Madison briefly left public office to preside over his plantation.. Early in his tenure, Madison became an ally of President Washington, who looked to Madison as the person who best understood the constitution. Father of the Bill of Rights Though the idea for a bill of rights had been suggested at the end of the constitutional convention, the delegates wanted to go home and thought the proposal unnecessary. The omission of a bill of rights became the main argument of the antifederalists against the constitution. Though no state conditioned ratification of the constitution on a bill of rights, several states came close, and the issue almost prevented the constitution from being ratified. Some antifederalists continued to contest this after the constitution was ratified and threatened the entire nation with another, more partisan, constitutional convention. Madison objected to a specific bill of rights for several reasons. he thought it was unnecessary, since it purported to protect against powers that the federal government had not been granted he also considered the enumeration of some rights might be taken to imply the absence of other rights and that at the state level, bills of rights had proven to be useless paper barriers against government powers. Though few in the new congress wanted to debate a possible Bill of Rights , Madison pressed the issue.. Congress was busy setting up the new government, most wanted to wait for the system to show its defects before amending the constitution, and the antifederalist movements had died out quickly once the constitution was ratified. Despite this, Madison still feared that the states would compel congress to call for a new constitutional convention, which they had the right to do. He also believed that the constitution did not sufficiently protect the national government from excessive democracy and parochialism , so he saw the amendments as mitigation of these problems. On June 8, 1789, Madison introduced his bill proposing amendments consisting of Nine Articles comprising up to 20 potential amendments. Madison initially proposed that the amendments be incorporated into the body of the Constitution. The House passed most of the amendments, but rejected the idea of placing them in the body of the Constitution. Instead, it adopted 17 amendments to be attached separately and sent this bill to the Senate.. Madison was a staunch proponent of the right of Americans to a civil jury trial. He initially introduced an amendment to the U.S. Constitution that guaranteed all citizens the right to a jury trial in all civil cases where there was 20 or more at stake. While the original amendment failed, the guaranty of a civil jury trial was incorporated into the Bill of Rights as the Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution.. In June 1789, urging adoption of the right to civil jury trials, he explained, Trial by jury in civil cases is as essential to secure the liberty of the people as any one of the preexistent rights of nature. The Senate edited the amendments still further, making 26 changes of its own, and condensing their number to twelve.. Madisons proposal to apply parts of the Bill of Rights to the states as well as the federal government was eliminated, as was his final proposed change to the preamble.. A House Senate Conference Committee then convened to resolve the numerous differences between the two Bill of Rights proposals. On September 24, 1789, the committee issued its report, which finalized 12 Constitutional Amendments for the House and Senate to consider. This version was approved by joint resolution of Congress on September 25, 1789. Of the proposed twelve Amendments, Articles Three through Twelve were ratified as additions to the Constitution on December 15, 1791, were renumbered one through ten, and became the Bill of Rights. Proposed Article Two became part of the Constitution in 1992 as the Twentyseventh Amendment. Proposed Article One is technically still pending before the states. Debates on foreign policy When Britain and France went to war in 1793, the U.S. was caught in the middle. The 1778 treaty of alliance with France was still in effect, yet most of the new countrys trade was with Britain. War with Britain became imminent in 1794, after the British seized hundreds of American ships that were trading with French colonies. Madison believed that the United States was stronger than Britain, and that a trade war with Britain, although risking a real war by that government, would probably succeed, and allow Americans to assert their independence fully. Great Britain, he charged, has bound us in commercial manacles, and very nearly defeated the object of our independence. According to Varg, Madison discounted the more powerful British military when the latter declared her interests can be wounded almost mortally, while ours are invulnerable. The British West Indies, Madison maintained, could not live without American foodstuffs, but Americans could easily do without British manufactures. He concluded, it is in our power, in a very short time, to supply all the tonnage necessary for our own commerce. Washington avoided a trade war and instead secured friendly trade relations with Britain through the Jay Treaty of 1794. Madisons harsh and unsuccessful opposition to the treaty led to a permanent break with Washington, ending a long friendship. The debate over the Jay Treaty would serve as the catalyst for the creation of the countrys first political parties.. Founding the DemocraticRepublican party Supporters for ratification of the Constitution became known as the Federalist Party. Those in opposition were labeled AntiFederalists, but neither group was a political party in the modern sense. Following ratification and formation of the first government in 1789, two new political factions formed along similar lines as the old division. The supporters of Alexander Hamiltons attempts to strengthen the national government called themselves Federalists, while those who opposed Hamilton called themselves Republicans . Madison and other Republican Party organizers, who favored states rights and local control, were struggling to find an institutional solution to the Constitutions seeming inability to prevent concentration of power in an administrative republic. As first Secretary of the Treasury, Hamilton created many new federal institutions, including the Bank of the United States. Madison led the unsuccessful attempt in Congress to block Hamiltons proposal, arguing that the new Constitution did not explicitly allow the federal government to form a bank. As early as May 26, 1792, Hamilton complained, Mr. Madison cooperating with Mr. Jefferson is at the head of a faction decidedly hostile to me and my administration. As Hamiltons influence in the administration grew, Madison and Jefferson increasingly came to fear the possible restoration of a monarchy, and they worked together to build an opposition to Hamiltons policies. By the end of Washingtons term, most Congressmen identified as either DemocraticRepublicans or Federalists.. Washington and Hamilton both left the government after 1797, but Madison and Jefferson remained in opposition during the Federalist presidency of John Adams. In 1798, the U.S. and France unofficially became combatants in the Quasi War, that involved naval warships and commercial vessels battling in the Caribbean. The Federalists created a standing army and passed the Alien and Sedition Acts, which were directed at French refugees engaged in American politics and against Republican editors. In response, Madison and Jefferson secretly drafted the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions declaring the enactments to be unconstitutional and noted that states, in contesting obnoxious laws, should interpose for arresting the progress of the evil. The resolutions were largely unpopular, even among republicans, since they called for state governments to invalidate federal laws. Jefferson went further, urging states to secede if necessary, though Madison convinced Jefferson to relent this extreme view. According to Chernow, Madisons position was a breathtaking evolution for a man who had pleaded at the Constitutional Convention that the federal government should possess a veto over state laws. Chernow argues that Madisons politics remained closely aligned with Jeffersons until his experience as president with a weak national government during the War of 1812 caused Madison to appreciate the need for a strong central government to aid national defense. At the time, he began to support a national bank, a stronger navy, and a standing army. The historian Gordon S. Wood says that Lance Banning, as in his Sacred Fire of Liberty , is the only presentday scholar to maintain that Madison did not change his views in the 1790s. In claiming this, Banning downplays Madisons nationalism in the 1780s. Wood notes that many historians struggle to understand Madison, but Wood looks at him in the terms of Madisons own times as a nationalist but one with a different conception of nationalism from that of the Federalists. He wanted to avoid a Europeanstyle government and always thought that the embargo would ultimately have been successful. Thus, Wood assesses Madison from a different point of view. Gary Rosen and Banning use other approaches to suggest Madisons consistency... Marriage and family Montpelier, Madisons tobacco plantation in Virginia Madison was married for the first time at the age of 43 on September 15, 1794, James Madison married Dolley Payne Todd, a 26yearold widow, at Harewood, in what is now Jefferson County, West Virginia.. Madison had no children but adopted Todds one surviving son, John Payne Todd , after the marriage. Dolley Payne was born May 20, 1768, at the New Garden Quaker settlement in North Carolina, where her parents, John Payne and Mary Coles Payne, lived briefly. Dolleys sister, Lucy Payne, had recently married George Steptoe Washington, a nephew of President Washington. As a member of Congress, Madison had doubtless met the widow Todd at social functions in Philadelphia, then the nations capital. She had been living there with her late husband. In May 1794, Madison asked their mutual friend Aaron Burr to arrange a meeting. By August, she had accepted his proposal of marriage. For marrying Madison, a nonQuaker, she was expelled from the Society of Friends. Also in 1794 Madison was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Dolley Madison put her social gifts to use when the couple lived in Washington, beginning when he was Secretary of State. With the White House still under construction, she advised as to its furnishings and sometimes served as First Lady for ceremonial functions for President Thomas Jefferson, a widower and friend. When her husband was president, she created the role of First Lady, using her social talents to advance his program. She is credited with adding to his popularity in office. Madisons father died in 1801 and at age 50, Madison inherited the large plantation of Montpelier and other holdings, and his fathers 108 slaves. He had begun to act as a steward of his fathers properties by 1780. United States Secretary of State 1801 1809 The original treaty of the Louisiana Purchase Jefferson defeated Adams in the 1800 presidential election. Jefferson wanted to oversee his administrations foreign policy, and he selected the loyal Madison for the position of Secretary of State despite the latters lack of foreign policy experience. Along with Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin, Madison became of the two major influences in Jeffersons cabinet.. At the start of his term, Madison was a party to the United States Supreme Court case Marbury v. Madison , in which the doctrine of judicial review was asserted by the high Court, much to the annoyance of the Jeffersonians who did not want a powerful federalist judiciary. Throughout Jeffersons presidency, much of Europe was at war, and the main challenge to the Jefferson administration was maintaining neutrality during the Napoleonic Wars.. Shortly before Jeffersons election, Napoleon seized power from the hapless French Directory, which had recently mismanaged Frances finances in unsuccessful wars and had lost control of SaintDomingue after a slave rebellion. Beginning in 1802, Napoleon sent more than 20,000 troops in an attempt to restore slavery on the island, as its colonial sugar cane plantations had been the chief revenue producer for France in the New World. The warfare went badly and the troops were further decimated by yellow fever. Napoleon gave up on the restoration of a colonial empire in the Americas and offered to sell the Louisiana territory to the United States in 1803. Later that year, the remaining 7,000 French troops were withdrawn from the island, and in 1804 Haiti declared its independence as the second republic in the western hemisphere. Jefferson had originally sent delegates to France to negotiate the sale of New Orleans, but upon learning of Napoleons offer to sell the entire Louisiana territory, Jefferson quickly agreed to it, resulting in the Louisiana Purchase. Many contemporaries and later historians, such as Ron Chernow, noted that Madison and President Jefferson ignored their strict construction of the Constitution to take advantage of the purchase opportunity. Jefferson would have preferred a constitutional amendment authorizing the purchase, but did not have time nor was he required to do so. The Senate quickly ratified the treaty providing for the purchase. The House, with equal alacrity, passed enabling legislation. The Jefferson administration argued that the purchase had included West Florida, but France refused to acknowledge this and Florida remained under the control of Spain. With the wars raging in Europe, Madison tried to maintain American neutrality, and insisted on the legal rights of the U.S. as a neutral party under international law. Neither London nor Paris showed much respect, however, and the situation deteriorated during Jeffersons second term. After Napoleon achieved victory at over his enemies in continental Europe at the Battle of Austerlitz, he became more aggressive and tried to starve Britain into submission with an embargo that was economically ruinous to both sides. Madison and Jefferson also decided on an embargo to punish Britain and France, forbidding American trade with any foreign nation. The embargo failed in the United States just as it did in France, and caused massive hardships up and down the seaboard, which depended on foreign trade. The Federalists made a comeback in the Northeast by attacking the embargo, which was allowed to expire just as Jefferson was leaving office. Election of 1808 With Jeffersons retirement imminent as his second term came to a close, Madison became his partys choice for president in 1808. He was opposed by Rep. John Randolph, who had broken earlier with Jefferson and Madison. The Republican Party Congressional caucus chose the candidate and easily selected Madison over James Monroe.. As the Federalist Party by this time had largely collapsed outside New England, Madison easily defeated Federalist Charles Cotesworth Pinckney.. At a height of only five feet, four inches , and never weighing more than 100 pounds, he became the most diminutive president. Presidency 1809 1817 James Madison engraving by David Edwin from between 1809 and 1817 Upon his inauguration in 1809, Madison immediately faced opposition to his planned nomination of Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin as Secretary of State, led by Sen. William B. Giles. Madison chose not to fight Congress for the nomination but kept Gallatin, a carry over from the Jefferson administration, in the Treasury Department. The talented Swissborn Gallatin was Madisons primary advisor, confidant, and policy planner.. Madison appointed Robert Smith for Secretary of State, Jeffersons former Secretary of the Navy. For his Secretary of the Navy, Madison appointed Paul Hamilton. Madisons cabinet, which included men of unremarkable talent, was chosen for the purposes of national interest and political harmony. When Madison assumed office in 1809, the federal government had a surplus of 9,500,000 by 1810 the national debt had been reduced, and taxes cut.. Bank of the United States Madison sought to continue Jeffersons agenda particularly dismantling the system left behind by the Federalist Party under Washington and Adams. One of the most pressing issues Madison confronted was the first Bank of the United States. Its twentyyear charter was scheduled to expire in 1811, and while Gallatin insisted that the bank was a necessity, Congress failed to reauthorize it. As the absence of a national bank made war with Britain very difficult to finance, Congress passed a bill in 1814 chartering a second national bank. Madison vetoed it.. In 1816, Congress passed another bill to charter a second national bank Madison signed the act.. Prelude to war Congress had repealed the embargo right before Madison became president, but troubles with the British and French continued.Rutland , p. 13 Americas new nonintercourse policy was to trade with all countries including France and Britain if restrictions on shipping were removed.Rutland , p. 39 Although initially promising, Madisons diplomatic efforts to get the British to withdraw the Orders in Council were rejected by British Foreign Secretary George Canning in April 1809.Bradford Perkins, Prologue to war England and the United States, 1805 1812 full text online Aside from U.S. trade with France, the central dispute between the Great Britain and the United States was the impressment of sailors by the British. During the long and expensive war against France, many British citizens were forced by their own government to join the navy, and many of these conscripts defected to U.S. merchant ships. Unable to tolerate this loss of manpower, the British seized several U.S. ships and forced captured crewmen, some of whom were not in fact not British subjects, to serve in the British navy. This impressment contributed greatly to growing anger towards the British in the United States.. By August 1809, diplomatic relations with Britain deteriorated as minister David Erskine was withdrawn and replaced by hatchet man Francis James Jackson.Rutland , pp. 40 44. Madison however, resisted calls for war, as he was ideologically opposed to the debt and taxes necessary for a war effort. British historian Paul Langford sees the removal in 1809 of Erskine as a major British blunder The British ambassador in Washington Erskine brought affairs almost to an accommodation, and was ultimately disappointed not by American intransigence but by one of the outstanding diplomatic blunders made by a Foreign Secretary. It was Canning who, in his most irresponsible manner and apparently out of sheer dislike of everything American, recalled the ambassador Erskine and wrecked the negotiations, a piece of most gratuitous folly. As a result, the possibility of a new embarrassment for Napoleon turned into the certainty of a much more serious one for his enemy. Though the British cabinet eventually made the necessary concessions on the score of the OrdersinCouncil, in response to the pressures of industrial lobbying at home, its action came too late . The loss of the North American markets could have been a decisive blow. As it was by the time the United States declared war, the Continental System Napoleon was beginning to crack, and the danger correspondingly diminishing. Even so, the war, inconclusive though it proved in a military sense, was an irksome and expensive embarrassment which British statesman could have done much more to avert.Paul Langford, The eighteenth century 16881815 p 228 After Jackson accused Madison of duplicity with Erskine, Madison had Jackson barred from the State Department and sent packing to Boston.Rutland , pp. 44 45. During his first State of the Union Address in November 1809, Madison asked Congress for advice and alternatives concerning the BritishAmerican trade crisis, and warned of the possibility of war. By spring 1810, Madison was specifically asking Congress for more appropriations to increase the Army and Navy in preparation for war with Britain.Rutland , pp. 46 47 Together with the effects of European peace, the United States economy began to recover early in Madisons presidency. By the time Madison was standing for reelection, the Peninsular War in Spain had spread, while at the same time Napoleon invaded Russia, and the entire European continent was once again embroiled in war. By 1809 the Federalist Party was no longer competitive outside a few strongholds. Some former members had joined Madisons Republican Party.Rutland , p. 55. Though one party appeared to dominate, it had begun to split into rival factions, which would later form the basis of the Second Party System. In particular, with hostilities against Britain appearing increasingly likely, factions favoring and opposing a war formed in Congress.Rutland , p. 57 The predominant faction, the War Hawks, were led by House Speaker Henry Clay. When war finally did break out, the war effort was led by the War Hawks in Congress under Clay at least as much as it was by Madison this accorded with the presidents preference for checks and balances. War of 1812 Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry defeats British Navy at the Battle of Lake Erie in 1813.Powell 1873 With continued attacks by the British on American shipping, both Madison and the broader American public were ready for war with Britain.. Many Americans called for a second war of independence to restore honor and stature to the new nation.Norman K. Risjord, 1812 Conservatives, War Hawks, and the Nations Honor, William And Mary Quarterly, 1961 18 196 210. in JSTOR With Britain in the midst of the Napoleonic Wars, many Americans, Madison included, believed that the United States could easily capture Canada, at which point the U.S. could use Canada as a bargaining chip for all other disputes or simply retain control of it.. An angry public elected a war hawk Congress, led by Clay and John C. Calhoun. On June 1, 1812, Madison asked Congress for a declaration of war.. The declaration was passed along sectional and party lines, with intense opposition from the Federalists and the Northeast, where the economy had suffered during Jeffersons trade embargo..Ketcham , James Madison , pp. 508 09 Madison hurriedly called on Congress to put the country into an armor and an attitude demanded by the crisis, specifically recommending enlarging the army, preparing the militia, finishing the military academy, stockpiling munitions, and expanding the navy.Ketcham , James Madison , pp. 509 15 Madison faced formidable obstacles a divided cabinet, a factious party, a recalcitrant Congress, obstructionist governors, and incompetent generals, together with militia who refused to fight outside their states. The most serious problem facing the war effort was lack of unified popular support. There were serious threats of disunion from New England, which engaged in extensive smuggling with Canada and refused to provide financial support or soldiers.Stagg, 1983. Events in Europe also went against the United States. Shortly after the United States declared war, Napoleon launched an invasion of Russia, and the failure of that campaign turned the tide against French and towards Britain and her allies.. In the years prior to the war, Jefferson and Madison had reduced the size of the military, closed the Bank of the U.S., and narrowed lowered taxes. These decisions added to the challenges facing the United States, as by the time the war began, Madisons military force consisted mostly of poorly trained militia members. defeats HMS Guerriere , a significant event during the war. Military action Madison hoped that the war would be over in a couple months after the capture of Canada, but his hopes were quickly dashed. Madison had believed the state militias would rally to the flag and invade Canada, but the governors in the Northeast failed to cooperate. Their militias either sat out the war or refused to leave their respective states for action. The senior command at the War Department and in the field proved incompetent or cowardly the general at Detroit surrendered to a smaller British force without firing a shot. Gallatin discovered the war was almost impossible to fund, since the national bank had been closed and major financiers in the Northeast refused to help.Donald R. Hickey, The War of 1812 A Short History The American campaign in Canada, led by Henry Dearborn, ended with defeat in the Battle of Stoney Creek.. The British armed American Indians in the Northwest, most notably several tribes allied with the Shawnee chief, Tecumseh. But, after losing control of Lake Erie at the naval Battle of Lake Erie in 1813, the British were forced to retreat. General William Henry Harrison caught up with them at the Battle of the Thames, where he destroyed the British and Indian armies, killed Tecumseh, and permanently destroyed Indian power in the Great Lakes region. Madison remains the only president to lead troops in battle while in office, although that battle did not go well for the American side. The British then raided Washington, as Madison headed a dispirited militia. Dolley Madison rescued White House valuables and documents shortly before the British burned the White House, the Capitol and other public buildings.Thomas Fleming, Dolley Madison Saves The Day Smithsonian 4012 50 56.Anthony Pitch, The Burning of Washington The British Invasion of 1814 . After the disastrous start to the War of 1812, Madison accepted a Russian invitation to arbitrate the war and sent Gallatin, John Quincy Adams, and James Bayard to Europe in hopes of quickly ending the war. While Madison worked to end the war, the U.S. experienced some military success, particularly at sea. The U.S. naval squadron on Lake Erie successfully defended itself and captured its opponents of the Royal Navy. All six British vessels were captured by the American forces. This victory crippled the supply and reinforcement of British military forces in the western theatre of the war, which forced the British troops and their Native allies to retreat. Commander Oliver Hazard Perry reported his victory with the simple statement, We have met the enemy, and they are ours.Roosevelt, Theodore, The Naval War of 1812 , pp. 147 52, The Modern Library, New York, NY. America had built up one of the largest merchant fleets in the world, though it had been partially dismantled under Jefferson and Madison. Madison authorized many of these ships to become privateers in the war. Armed, they captured 1,800 British ships.Rowen, Bob, American Privateers in the War of 1812, paper presented to the New York Military Affairs Symposium, Graduate Center of the City University of New York, 2001, , led Francis Scott Key to write the poem that was set to music as the U.S. national anthem, The Star Spangled Banner.The StarSpangled Banner and the War of 1812, Encyclopedia Smithsonian . The American defenders repulsed the British invasion army in the most decisive victory of the war.Reilly, Robin, The British at the Gates The New Orleans Campaign in the War of 1812 , 1974. The Treaty of Ghent ended the war in February 1815, with no territorial gains on either side. The Americans felt that their national honor had been restored in what has been called the Second War of American Independence.Second War of American Independence, Americas Library Web site appeared as though American valor at New Orleans had forced the British to surrender after almost winning. This view, while inaccurate, strongly contributed to the postwar euphoria that persisted for a decade. It also helps explain the significance of the war, even if it was strategically inconclusive. Napoleon was defeated for the last time at the Battle of Waterloo near the end of Madisons presidency, and as the Napoleonic Wars ended, so did the War of 1812. Madisons final years began an unprecedented period of peace and prosperity, which was called the Era of Good Feelings. Madisons reputation as president improved and Americans finally believed the United States had established itself as a world power.Rutland , p. 188 Postwar economy and internal improvements With peace established, Americans believed they had an emboldened independence from Britain. The Federalist Party, which had called for secession over the war at the Hartford Convention, dissolved. With Europe finally at peace, the Era of Good Feelings described the prosperity and equable political environment. Some political contention continued for instance, in 1816, twothirds of the incumbents in Congress were defeated for reelection after voting to increase their salary. Madison approved a Hamiltonian national bank, an effective taxation system based on tariffs, a standing professional military, and the internal improvements championed by Henry Clay under his American System. In 1816, pensions were extended to orphans and widows from the War of 1812 for a period of 5 years at the rate of half pay. However, in his last act before leaving office, Madison vetoed the Bonus Bill of 1817, which would have financed more internal improvements of roads, bridges, and canals Having considered the bill this day presented to me... I am constrained by the insuperable difficulty I feel in reconciling this bill with the Constitution of the United States.... The legislative powers vested in Congress are specified and enumerated in... the Constitution, and it does not appear that the power proposed to be exercised by the bill is among the enumerated powers. Madison rejected the view of Congress that the General Welfare provision of the Taxing and Spending Clause justified the bill Such a view of the Constitution would have the effect of giving to Congress a general power of legislation instead of the defined and limited one hitherto understood to belong to them, the terms common defense and general welfare embracing every object and act within the purview of a legislative trust. Madison urged a variety of measures that he felt were best executed under the national authority, including federal support for roads and canals that would bind more closely together the various parts of our extended confederacy. Indian policy Creek men being taught how to use a plow by Benjamin Hawkins in 1805. Upon assuming office on March 4, 1809, in his first Inaugural Address to the nation, Madison stated that the federal governments duty was to convert the American Indians by the participation of the improvements of which the human mind and manners are susceptible in a civilized state.. Like Jefferson, Madison had a paternalistic attitude toward American Indians, encouraging the men to give up hunting and become farmers.. Although there are scant details, Madison often met with Southeastern and Western Indians who included the Creek and Osage. Madison believed their adoption of Europeanstyle agriculture would help the Creek assimilate the values of BritishU.S. civilization. As pioneers and settlers moved West into large tracts of Cherokee, Choctaw, Creek, and Chickasaw territory, Madison ordered the U.S. Army to protect Native lands from intrusion by settlers, to the chagrin of his military commander Andrew Jackson. Jackson wanted the President to ignore Indian pleas to stop the invasion of their lands. and resisted carrying out the presidents order. In the Northwest Territory after the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811, Indians were pushed off their tribal lands and replaced entirely by white settlers. By 1815, with a population of 400,000 EuropeanAmerican settlers in Ohio, Indian rights to their lands had effectively become null and void. Later life Portrait of James Madison c. 1821,by Gilbert Stuart When Madison left office in 1817 at age 65, he retired to Montpelier, his tobacco plantation in Orange County, Virginia, not far from Jeffersons Monticello. Dolley, who thought they would finally have a chance to travel to Paris, was 49. As with both Washington and Jefferson, Madison left the presidency a poorer man than when elected. His plantation experienced a steady financial collapse, due to the continued price declines in tobacco and also due to his stepsons mismanagement. Insight into Madison is provided by the first White House memoir, A Colored Mans Reminiscences of James Madison , authored by his former slave Paul Jennings, who from the age of 10 served the president as a footman, and later as a valet for the rest of Madisons life. After Madisons death, Jennings was purchased in 1845 from Dolley Madison by senator Daniel Webster, who enabled him to work off the cost and gain his freedom. Jennings published his short account in 1865. He had the highest respect for Madison and said he never struck a slave, nor permitted an overseer to do so. Jennings said that if a slave misbehaved, Madison would meet with the person privately to discuss the behavior. Some historians speculate that Madisons mounting debt was one of the reasons he refused to allow his notes on the Constitutional Convention, or its official records in his possession, to be published in his lifetime. He knew the value of his notes, and wanted them to bring money to his estate for Dolleys use as his plantation failed he was hoping for one hundred thousand dollars from the sale of his papers, of which the notes were the gem.. Madisons financial troubles weighed on him as deteriorating mental and physical health ensued. In his later years, Madison became highly concerned about his historic legacy. He resorted to modifying letters and other documents in his possession, changing days and dates, adding and deleting words and sentences, and shifting characters. By the time he had reached his late seventies, this straightening out had become almost an obsession. As an example, he edited a letter written to Jefferson criticizing Lafayette Madison not only inked out original passages, but even forged Jeffersons handwriting as well.. Historian Drew R. McCoy has said, During the final six years of his life, amid a sea of personal financial troubles that were threatening to engulf him...At times mental agitation issued in physical collapse. For the better part of a year in 1831 and 1832 he was bedridden, if not silenced... Literally sick with anxiety, he began to despair of his ability to make himself understood by his fellow citizens.. In 1826, after the death of Jefferson, Madison was appointed as the second Rector of the University of Virginia. He retained the position as college chancellor for ten years until his death in 1836. Portrait of Madison, age 82,c. 1833 In 1829, at the age of 78, Madison was chosen as a representative to the Virginia Constitutional Convention for revision of the commonwealths constitution. It was his last appearance as a statesman. The issue of greatest importance at this convention was apportionment. The western districts of Virginia complained that they were underrepresented because the state constitution apportioned voting districts by county. The increased population in the Piedmont and western parts of the state were not proportionately represented by delegates in the legislature. Western reformers also wanted to extend suffrage to all white men, in place of the prevailing property ownership requirement. Madison tried in vain to effect a compromise. Eventually, suffrage rights were extended to renters as well as landowners, but the eastern planters refused to adopt citizen population apportionment. They added slaves held as property to the population count, to maintain a permanent majority in both houses of the legislature, arguing that there must be a balance between population and property represented. Madison was disappointed at the failure of Virginians to resolve the issue more equitably.. Madison was also concerned about the continuation of slavery in Virginia and the South. He believed that transportation of free American blacks to Africa offered a solution, as promoted by the American Colonization Society . He told Lafayette at the time of the convention that colonization would create a rapid erasure of the blot on our Republican character.. The British sociologist Harriet Martineau visited with Madison during her tour of the United States in 1834. She characterized his belief in the colonization solution to slavery as bizarre and incongruous. Madison may have sold or donated his gristmill in support of the ACS. Historian McCoy believes that The Convention of 1829... pushed Madison steadily to the brink of selfdelusion, if not despair. The dilemma of slavery undid him. Like most African Americans of the time, Madisons slaves wanted to remain in the U.S. where they had been born, believed their work earned them citizenship, and resisted repatriation. William R. Denslow supposedly found evidence that James Madison might have been a Mason, when in 1795, John Francis Mercer is said to have written to Madison, I have had no opportunity of congratulating you before on your becoming a free Mason a very ancient honorable fraternity. However, in an 1832 letter to Stephen Bates, Madison wrote that he never was a Mason, and was a stranger to the principles of it. Madisons tombstone, Montpelier Despite failing health, Madison wrote several memoranda on political subjects, including an essay against the appointment of chaplains for Congress and the armed forces. He felt it would produce religious exclusion as well as political disharmony. He was tempted to admit chaplains for the navy, as sailors might otherwise have no opportunity for worship. Between 1834 and 1835, he sold 25 of his slaves to offset financial losses on his plantation. Madison lived to a year later, increasingly disregarded by the next generation of the American polity. Madison died of heart failure at Montpelier on June 28. 1836. He was buried in the Madison Family Cemetery at Montpelier,. which is maintained to this day. In 1842, Dolley Madison sold the Montpelier mansion, and in 1844 sold the extensive plantation lands to Henry W. Moncure. She leased half of the remaining slaves to Moncure. The other half were inherited by her, her son John Payne Todd, and James Madison, Jr., a nephew. By 1850, the Montpelier plantation was a ghost of its former self. Legacy The historian Garry Wills wrote, Madisons claim on our admiration does not rest on a perfect consistency, any more than it rests on his presidency. He has other virtues. ... As a framer and defender of the Constitution he had no peer. ... The finest part of Madisons performance as president was his concern for the preserving of the Constitution. ... No man could do everything for the country not even Washington. Madison did more than most, and did some things better than any. That was quite enough.. George F. Will wrote that if we truly believed that the pen is mightier than the sword, our nations capital would have been called Madison, D.C., instead of Washington, D.C.Quinn, Michael, Preserving a Legacy Montpelier Will be Showcase for Madison, Richmond Times Dispatch , December 5, 2004. Madison, in The Federalist Papers , in Federalist No. 51, wrote, It is of great importance in a republic not only to guard the society against the oppression of its rulers, but to guard one part of the society against the injustice of the other part... In a society under the forms of which the stronger faction can readily unite and oppress the weaker, anarchy may as truly be said to reign as in a state of nature, where the weaker individual is not secured against the violence of the stronger. In 1986, Congress created the James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation as part of the bicentennial celebration of the Constitution. The Foundation offers 24,000 graduate level fellowships to secondary teachers to undertake a masters degree which emphasizes the study of the Constitution. Montpelier, his familys plantation and his home in Orange, Virginia, has been designated a National Historic Landmark. The James Madison Memorial Building is a building of the United States Library of Congress in Washington, DC and serves as the official memorial to Madison. Madison is also a character depicted in 2015 musical Hamilton , originated by actor Okieriete Onaodowan both off and onBroadway Madison is portrayed as an ally to Thomas Jefferson and adversary to Alexander Hamilton in the second act of the show. See also Republicanism Report of 1800, produced by Madison to support the Virginia Resolutions US Presidents on US postage stamps List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States who owned slaves List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience References Sources , scholarly biography paperback ed. scholarly overview of his two terms. Short bio. Further reading Biographies , the standard scholarly biography single volume condensation of 6vol biography detailed popular history Ebook Analytic studies short survey with primary sources Historiography Primary sources The main scholarly edition Founders Online, searchable edition reprints his major messages and reports. External links White House biography James Madison A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress The James Madison Papers, 1723 1836 at the Library of Congress The Papers of James Madison, subset of Founders Online from the National Archives American President James Madison at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia James Madison at the Online Library of Liberty, Liberty Fund Memorial and Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments at the U.S. National Archives The Papers of James Madison at the Avalon Project Montpelier, home of James Madison Memories of Montpelier Home of James and Dolley Madison, a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places lesson plan Life Portrait of James Madison, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , April 9, 1999 Writings of Jefferson and Madison from CSPANs American Writers A Journey Through History Booknotes interview with William Lee Miller on The Business of May Next James Madison and the Founding , June 14, 1992. James Madison Personal Manuscripts Category1751 births Category1836 deaths Category18thcentury American Episcopalians Category18thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury American Episcopalians Category19thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican deists CategoryAmerican Episcopalians CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of the War of 1812 CategoryAmerican planters CategoryAmerican political philosophers CategoryAmerican slave owners CategoryBurials in Virginia CategoryContinental Congressmen from Virginia CategoryDelegates to the Virginia Ratifying Convention CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryFellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryJefferson administration cabinet members CategoryMadison family CategoryMembers of the American Philosophical Society CategoryMembers of the American Antiquarian Society CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Virginia CategoryMembers of the Virginia House of Delegates CategoryPeople from King George County, Virginia CategoryPeople from Orange County, Virginia CategoryPeople of the American Enlightenment CategoryPeople of Virginia in the American Revolution CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryPrinceton University alumni CategorySigners of the United States Constitution CategoryThe Federalist Papers CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1808 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1812 CategoryUnited States Secretaries of State CategoryUniversity of Virginia people CategoryVirginia colonial people CategoryVirginia DemocraticRepublicans CategoryZachary Taylor family CategoryPhilosophers from Virginia Category18thcentury American philosophers Category19thcentury Americanphilosophers
Martin Van Buren was an American statesman who served as the eighth President of the United States from 1837 to 1841. A founder of the Democratic Party, he served in a number of senior roles, including eighth Vice President and tenth Secretary of State , both under Andrew Jackson. Van Buren won the presidency by promising to continue Jacksons policies. Shortly after taking office, the Panic of 1837 struck the nation, and his inability to deal effectively with the economic crisis, combined with the growing political strength of the opposition Whig Party, led to his defeat when he ran for reelection. During his halfcentury of public service, he built, perfected, and defended a new system of political parties at first the state and then the federal level. A delegate to a political convention at age 18, he quickly moved from local to state politics, gaining fame both as a political organizer and an accomplished lawyer. Elected to the Senate by the New York State Legislature in 1821, he reorganized the DemocraticRepublican Party in New York and established the Albany Regency to keep it in power. Van Buren supported William H. Crawford for president in the 1824 election. John Quincy Adams was then made president in a contingent election. The supporters of Jackson, who had won a plurality of the popular and electoral vote, coalesced around Jackson to create the new Democratic Party. Van Buren, alarmed by the nationalist policies of the Adams administration, soon joined them. Van Buren was a major supporter and organizer for Jackson in the 1828 election, and ran for Governor of New York in the hope of using his personal popularity to boost Jacksons campaign. Jackson and Van Buren were elected, and after serving as governor for two months, Van Buren resigned to become Jacksons Secretary of State. During Jacksons eight years as president, Van Buren was a key advisor, and built the organizational structure for the coalescing Democratic Party, particularly in New York. He resigned as Secretary of State in 1831 to help resolve the Petticoat affair. Jackson gave Van Buren a recess appointment as American minister to Britain. Van Burens nomination was rejected by the Senate, cutting short his service in London, but he was elected Vice President in the 1832 election. With Jacksons strong support, Van Buren faced little opposition for the presidential nomination at the 1835 Democratic National Convention, and he defeated several Whig opponents in the 1836 presidential election. He was the first president to be born a United States citizen. Of Dutch ancestry, he is the only US president who spoke English as a second language. As president, Van Buren was blamed for the depression of 1837 hostile newspapers called him Martin Van Ruin. He attempted to cure the economic problems by keeping control of federal funds in an independent treasury, rather than in state banks, but Congress would not approve of this until 1840. In foreign affairs, he denied the application of Texas for admission to the Union, unwilling to upset the balance of free and slave states in the Missouri Compromise, and hoping to avoid war with Mexico over Texas annexation. Additionally, relations with Britain and its colonies in Canada proved to be strained from the bloodless Aroostook War and the Caroline Affair. In the 1840 election, Van Buren was voted out of office, losing to Whig candidate William Henry Harrison. Van Buren was the leading candidate for the Democratic nomination in 1844, but his continued opposition to the annexation of Texas caused him to lose to James K. Polk, who went on to win the election. In the 1848 election, Van Buren ran unsuccessfully as the candidate of the antislavery Free Soil Party. He returned to the Democratic fold to endorse Franklin Pierce , James Buchanan , and Stephen A. Douglas for the presidency. His increasingly abolitionist views and support for the Union led him to support Abraham Lincolns policies after the start of the American Civil War. Van Burens health began to fail in 1861, and he died in July 1862 at age 79. Early life and education Record of Kinderhook Dutch Reformed Church Maarten Van Buren baptism December 15, 1782 Martin Van Buren was born on December 5, 1782, in the village of Kinderhook, New York about south of Albany on the Hudson River. He was the first President not born a British subject, or even of British ancestry. He was a descendant of Cornelis Maessen of the village of Buurmalsen, near the town of Buren in the Netherlands, who had come to North America in 1631 and had purchased a plot of land on Manhattan Island his son Martin Cornelisen took the surname Van Buren... His father, Abraham Van Buren , owned and operated an inn and tavern, and Martin was born in a house that was attached to the tavern. Abraham Van Buren supported the Patriot cause during the American Revolution as a captain in the Albany County Militias 7th Regiment, and later joined the Jeffersonian Republicans. He was active in local politics and government, and served as Kinderhooks town clerk from 1787 to 1797. In 1776, Abraham Van Buren married Maria Hoes Van Alen , the widow of Johannes Van Alen. Although both Abraham and Maria Van Buren were fifth generation residents of the Province of New York, all of their forebears were of Dutch ancestry, as was the case for most of Kinderhooks residents, and they still spoke Dutch as their first language. The future president was baptized on December 15, 1782, as Maarten Van Buren, the original Dutch spelling of his name. He had four full siblings and three halfsiblings. From his mothers first marriage Marytje Van Alen , married John L. Hoes. John I. Van Alen James I. Van Alen , who practiced law with Van Buren for a time and also served as a member of Congress . From his parents marriage. Dirckie Derike Van Buren , married Barent Hoes . Barent Hoes was the brother of Martin Van Burens wife, and served in local offices including town clerk. Jannetje Van Buren , who never married and who resided with her sister Dirckie Van Buren and brotherinlaw Barent Hoes. Lawrence Van Buren , a store owner and attorney who served as a militia officer in the War of 1812 and held local offices including Kinderhook Town Supervisor, postmaster, and presidential elector in 1852. Abraham Van Buren , an attorney who served as Columbia County Surrogate after Martin Van Buren and James I. Van Alen. Van Buren received a basic education at the village schoolhouse and briefly studied Latin at the Kinderhook Academy and at Washington Seminary in Claverack.. His formal education ended in 1796, when he began reading law at the office of Peter Silvester and his son Francis, prominent Federalist attorneys in Kinderhook.. Van Buren learned early to interact with people from varied ethnic, income, and societal groups, which he would later use to his advantage as a political organizer. Hannah Van Buren He was small in stature as an adult he was 5 feet 6 inches tall, and was often referred to as Little Van. When he first began his legal studies, he often presented an unkempt appearance in rough, homespun clothing. The Silvesters admonished Van Buren about how crucial a lawyers clothing and personal appearance were to the success of his practice. He accepted their advice and patterned his clothing, appearance, bearing and conduct after theirs. After six years under the Silvesters, the elder Silvester and DemocraticRepublican political figure John Peter Van Ness suggested that Van Burens political leanings constrained him to complete his education with a DemocraticRepublican attorney. Accepting this advice, he spent a final year of apprenticeship in the New York City office of John Van Nesss brother William P. Van Ness, a political lieutenant of Aaron Burr. Van Buren was admitted to the New York bar in 1803. Van Buren married Hannah Hoes, his childhood sweetheart and a daughter of his first cousin, on February 21, 1807, in Catskill, New York. Like Van Buren, she was raised in a Dutch home she spoke primarily Dutch, and spoke English with a distinct accent. The couple had five sons Abraham a graduate of West Point and career military officer John , graduate of Yale and Attorney General of New York Martin, Jr. , secretary to his father and editor of his fathers papers until a premature death from tuberculosis Winfield Scott Smith Thompson , an editor and special assistant to his father during Van Burens presidency. After 12 years of marriage, Hannah Van Buren contracted tuberculosis and died on February 5, 1819, at the age of 35.. Martin Van Buren never remarried. Early political career Van Buren had been active in politics from age 18 if not before he attended a DemocraticRepublican Party convention in Troy, New York where he worked successfully to secure for John Peter Van Ness the party nomination in a special election for the 6th Congressional District seat.. He formed a law partnership with his halfbrother James I. Van Alen and became financially secure enough to increase his focus on politics. He was a supporter of Aaron Burr, and allied himself with the George Clinton faction of the DemocraticRepublican Party. Van Buren supported Daniel D. Tompkins for Governor over incumbent Morgan Lewis in 1807. Tompkins won, and his allies won a majority in the state legislature. As a result, Van Buren was appointed Surrogate of Columbia County, New York, replacing Van Alen, who had supported Lewis. He served as Surrogate from 1808 until 1813, when the Federalist Party gained a majority in the state legislature and replaced him. Van Buren was a member of the New York State Senate from 1813 to 1820, and in 1813 joined the opposition party New York DemocraticRepublicans who fought DeWitt Clinton for control of that party in New York. Van Buren served as New York Attorney General from 1815 to 1819. He replaced William Floyd as a presidential elector in 1820, and voted for James Monroe and Daniel D. Tompkins. Though he never served in the military, during the War of 1812 Van Buren worked in the State Senate to pass war measures, including bills to expand the New York Militia and increase soldier pay. In addition, he was a special judge advocate appointed to serve as a prosecutor of William Hull during Hulls courtmartial following the surrender of Detroit. In the winter of 1814 15 he collaborated with Winfield Scott on ways to reorganize the New York Militia in anticipation of another military campaign in 1815. The reorganization would have included a position for Van Buren at a rank to be determined, but the wars end in February 1815 ended their work on the project. He initially opposed DeWitt Clintons plan for the Erie Canal, but relented when the Bucktails, the antiDeWitt Clinton DemocraticRepublicans, were able to gain a majority on the Erie Canal Commission he supported a bill to finance its construction through the sale of state bonds. From 1816 to 1829, Van Buren served as a member of the University of the State of New York Board of Regents. In 1817, Van Burens connection with socalled machine politics started when he created the first political organization encompassing all of New York, the Bucktails. The Bucktails succeeded in emphasizing party loyalty and used it to capture and control many patronage posts throughout New York. Van Buren gained the nickname of Little Magician for the skill with which he exploited the spoils system. He was a member of the 1820 state constitutional convention, where he favored expanded voting rights, but opposed universal suffrage and tried to maintain property requirements for voting. He was the leading figure in the Albany Regency, a group of Bucktail leaders who for more than a generation dominated New York politics and influenced national politics. The Regency, together with other political organizations such as Tammany Hall, played a major role in expanding the spoils system and making it a recognized and accepted procedure. While organizing and overseeing the operations of the Regency, Van Buren resided in Albany his housemate was Roger Skinner, a lifelong bachelor who was also a key Van Buren lieutenant in the State Senate and as Judge of the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York. Van Buren was the prime architect of the first nationwide political party the Jacksonian Democrats or Democratic Party, which evolved from the DemocraticRepublicans and relied on party loyalty and patronage to prevent contentious sectional issues, including tariffs and slavery, from becoming national crises. In Van Burens words, Without strong national political organizations, there would be nothing to moderate the prejudices between free and slaveholding states. As had James Madison and other Democratic Party organizers who favored states rights and local control, Van Buren was struggling to find an institutional solution to the Constitutions seeming inability to prevent concentration of power in an administrative republic. Early in his life Van Buren owned a slave, a man named Tom who served as his personal valet. Tom ran away in 1814 and eventually settled in Canada, with Van Buren making no effort to locate him. In 1824 Tom was found to be living in Worcester, Massachusetts. Since he still legally owned Tom , Van Buren privately agreed to sell Tom to the finder for 50, provided the finder, a resident of Rensselaer County, could guarantee that Tom would be captured without violence. He could not make such a guarantee, and his willingness to pay was lessened by the knowledge that Tom would be emancipated in fewer than three years even if he was reenslaved, so Tom remained free, as Van Buren probably intended. U.S. Senate and national politics Gubernatorial portrait of Martin Van Buren by Daniel Huntington In February 1821 Van Buren was elected a U.S. Senator from New York, defeating incumbent Nathan Sanford, who ran as the Clintonian candidate. Van Buren initially favored internal improvements, such as road repairs and canal construction he proposed a constitutional amendment in 1824 to authorize such undertakings, but changed his position the following year. He voted for the tariffs of 1824 and 1828, and then gradually abandoned this protectionist position, later supporting tariffs for revenue only. In the presidential election of 1824, Van Buren supported the nominee of a Congressional caucus, Treasury Secretary William H. Crawford, and received the electoral votes of Georgia for Vice President. None of the presidential candidates Crawford, John Quincy Adams, Andrew Jackson, or Henry Clay had received a majority of the electoral college votes, so the choice fell to the United States House of Representatives. The House had to choose from among the top three candidates, so Clay was eliminated. Van Buren had originally hoped to block John Quincy Adams by denying him the state of New York, which was divided between supporters of Crawford and Adams. However, Representative Stephen Van Rensselaer swung New York to Adams. Adams won, and appointed Clay as Secretary of State. Because Clay had supported Adams in the House election, Jackson and Crawford supporters alleged corruption. After the House contest, Van Buren shrewdly kept out of the controversy which followed, and began looking forward to 1828. He switched his support early from Crawford, whose ill health after a stroke had made him a less than viable candidate, to Andrew Jackson, who had won the popular vote in 1824. Jackson was angered to see the presidency go to Adams after he received fewer popular votes, and eagerly looked forward to a rematch. Always notably courteous in his treatment of opponents, Van Buren showed no bitterness toward either Adams or Henry Clay, and he voted for Clays confirmation as Secretary of State, notwithstanding Jacksons corrupt bargain charge. At the same time, he opposed the AdamsClay plans for internal infrastructure improvements and declined to support U.S. participation in the Congress of Panama. As chair of the Judiciary Committee, he brought forward a number of measures for the improvement of judicial procedure, including one , which would have required a supermajority vote by the United States Supreme Court to declare a law unconstitutional. In May 1826, Van Buren joined with Senator Thomas Hart Benton in reporting on patronage in the executive branch, going against his own use of the spoils system to propose, in vain, that Presidents not be able to remove officeholders at will, and that Presidents report to Congress on the reason for dismissal of federal position holders. The 1828 Tariff of Abominations was recognized as his work. Since Democrats, especially Southerners, were generally opposed to tariffs that increased the price of manufactured goods from the North but did not benefit the raw materials produced in the South, Van Buren could normally have been expected to oppose tariffs. Political observers of the time viewed Van Burens efforts to pass the 1828 tariff as part of the campaign to elect Jackson as President. Anticipating that most Southerners would vote for Andrew Jackson no matter who else was running, Van Buren intended the tariff proposed by Jacksons Northern Democratic supporters in Congress to attract to Jacksons candidacy Northern voters, who generally favored high tariffs to protect the manufactured goods they produced. Van Buren voted in favor, later adopting the cover story that he had done so only in response to instructions from the New York State Legislature. Most Democrats, especially Southerners, continued to oppose tariffs after 1828. Van Burens political opponents in the Democratic Party used his 1828 vote against him for years afterwards to prevent him from obtaining Southern support for his candidacies. Van Buren was not an exceptional orator like Henry Clay or Daniel Webster, but his more important speeches show careful preparation and his opinions carried weight the oftrepeated charge that he refrained from declaring himself on crucial questions is hardly borne out by scrutiny of his senatorial career. In February 1827, he was reelected to the Senate by a large majority. He became one of the recognized managers of the Jackson campaign, and his tour of Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia in the spring of 1827 won support for Jackson from Crawford as Van Buren sought to reorganize and unify the old Republican party behind Jackson.Martin Van Buren to Thomas Ritchie, January 13, 1827. At the state level, Jacksons committee chairs would split up the responsibilities around the state and organize volunteers at the local level. Hurra Boys would plant hickory trees or hand out hickory sticks at rallies. In 1828 Van Buren ran for Governor of New York in an effort to use his personal popularity to bolster Jacksons chances of carrying New York in the presidential election. Jackson defeated Adams handily, leading the proAdams New York American to editorialize Organization is the secret of victory. By the want of it we have been overthrown. Van Buren won his election, and resigned from the Senate to start the gubernatorial term, which began on January 1, 1829. Van Burens tenure as New York governor is the second shortest on record. While his term was short, he did manage to pass the Bank Safety Fund Law through the Legislature. Secretary of State On March 5, 1829, President Jackson appointed Van Buren Secretary of State, an office which probably had been promised him before the 1828 elections, and Van Buren resigned the governorship on March 12. He was succeeded by his Lieutenant Governor, Enos T. Throop, a member of the Regency. As Secretary of State, Van Buren sought congeniality with the Kitchen Cabinet, Jacksons informal advisers. He sometimes opposed Jackson in the matter of removing political appointees from office to replace them with Jackson loyalists, but also saw to the replacement of postmasters in New York with Van Buren loyalists. In July 1829, Rutgers College awarded Van Buren the honorary degree of LL.D. No serious diplomatic crises arose during Van Burens tenure, but he achieved several notable successes, such as settling longstanding claims against France and winning reparations for property that had been seized during the Napoleonic Wars. He reached an agreement with the British to open trade with the British West Indies colonies and concluded a treaty with the Ottoman Empire that gained American merchants access to the Black Sea. Items on which he did not achieve success included settling the MaineNew Brunswick boundary dispute with Great Britain, gaining settlement of the U.S. claim to the Oregon Country, concluding a commercial treaty with Russia, and persuading Mexico to sell Texas. Van Buren also advised Jackson informally on matters of domestic policy in the controversy over the Bank of the United States, he sided with Jackson. He also allied with Jackson on the Indian Removal Act. After the breach between Jackson and Calhoun, which culminated with the Nullification Crisis, Van Burens position as one of Jacksons primary political supporters and policy advisors clearly branded him as the most prominent candidate for the vice presidency in 1832, and Jacksons most likely successor in 1836. Petticoat affair Mrs Floride Calhoun, a leader of the petticoats In Jacksons first term, Van Buren won the presidents lasting regard by his courtesies to Peggy Eaton, wife of Secretary of War John H. Eaton, whom the wives of the cabinet members and others had shunned over the circumstances surrounding their marriage and her alleged moral failures as a cabinet wife. Led by Floride Calhoun, wife of Vice President Calhoun, these women socially ostracized the Eatons, refused to pay courtesy calls at their home or receive them as visitors, and denied them invitations to social events. Because Calhoun was the most visible opponent of the Jackson administration, Jackson felt that Calhoun and other antiJackson officials were fanning the flames of the Peggy Eaton controversy to gain political leverage. As a widower, Van Buren was unaffected by the position of the Cabinet wives, and he supported Jacksons position that criticism of the Eatons would not be tolerated. By siding with Jackson, Van Buren helped create a countercoalition that weakened Calhoun. The dispute was resolved when Van Buren offered to resign in April 1831, Jackson accepted, and took the opportunity to reorganize his cabinet by asking for the resignations of Cabinet members whose wives were part of the antiEaton coalition. Postmaster General William T. Barry, who had sided with Jackson and Van Buren, was the lone cabinet member to stay, and Eaton eventually received appointments that took him away from Washington, first as governor of Florida Territory, and then as minister to Spain. VicePresidency After resigning as Secretary of State, Van Buren remained in office until June 1831, and continued to play a part in Jacksons Kitchen Cabinet. In August 1831 Jackson gave Van Buren a recess appointment as Minister to the Court of St. James and he arrived in London in September. He was cordially received, but in February he learned his nomination was rejected by the Senate on January 25, 1832. The rejection was attributed to Van Burens instructions while Secretary of State to Louis McLane, the American minister to Britain, which concerned the opening of the West Indies trade, and repudiated the foreign policy of Jacksons predecessors, which the Senate claimed was a breach of decorum. The rejection of Van Buren was essentially the work of Calhoun, who had opposed Van Burens confirmation, believing that Van Buren had attempted to keep him from becoming vice president by making overtures to Henry Clay to run on a ticket with William H. Crawford, Van Burens preferred candidate for president in 1824. Calhoun also opposed Van Buren for his role in the Petticoat Affair and his work on the 1828 tariff. When the vote on Van Burens nomination was taken, enough proCalhoun Democrats refrained from voting to produce a tie, thus giving Calhoun, in his role as presiding officer, the ability to cast a vote. He voted against Van Buren, and so achieved vengeance on Van Buren. Calhoun was elated, convinced that he had ended Van Burens career. It will kill him dead, sir, kill him dead. He will never kick, sir, never kick, Calhoun exclaimed to a friend within earshot of Missouri Senator Thomas Hart Benton. A painting of Van Buren by Francis Alexander, c. 1830 1840 Benton recognized the significance of Calhouns action, saying You have broken a minister and made a vice president. John Tyler, then serving as a Senator from Virginia, also recognized Calhouns overreach, writing to a friend that Van Buren is elevated by the silly thing of rejecting him. As Benton and Tyler foresaw, Calhouns move backfired, by making Van Buren appear the victim of petty politics, thus raising him in both Jacksons regard and the esteem of others in the Democratic Party. Far from ending Van Burens career, Calhouns action gave greater impetus to Van Burens candidacy for vice president. After a brief tour of Europe, Van Buren reached New York on July 5, 1832. The May 1832 Democratic National Convention, the partys first, had nominated him for vice president on the Jackson ticket. Van Burens nomination was not as strongly supported as Jacksons, particularly among southerners who recalled his work on the tariff in 1828, but he somewhat placated southerners by denying the right of Congress to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia without the consent of the slave states. The JacksonVan Buren ticket won the election of 1832 by a landslide, and Van Buren took office as Vice President in March 1833. During his time in office Van Buren continued to be one of Jacksons primary advisors and confidants, and accompanied Jackson on his tour of the northeastern United States in 1833. Jacksons confidence in Van Buren was further demonstrated after Jackson named Benjamin F. Butler, Van Burens political ally and former law partner, to serve as Attorney General, and John Forsyth, another Van Buren ally, to serve as Secretary of State. Van Burens support of Jackson in the Nullification Crisis and the decision not to recharter the Second Bank of the United States made him a target of Jacksons most vocal opponents. Van Buren was threatened with violence, including explicit comments from Senator George Poindexter of Mississippi, which prompted Van Buren to carry pistols for selfdefense. However he also demonstrated both the willingness and the ability to work with his opponents, cooperating with Clay and Calhoun to pass the compromise Tariff of 1833, which helped end the Nullification Crisis. During one contentious debate on the bank issue, Van Buren presided over the Senate as Clay spoke passionately about the harm he believed Jacksons bank policy would cause. Directing his remarks to Van Buren, Clay asked rhetorically whether Van Buren would approach Jackson and persuade him to change his mind. After Clay concluded, observers wondered how Van Buren would react. Van Burens response was to descend from the rostrum and ask Clay if he could borrow a pinch of snuff. Caught off guard, Clay reflexively handed over his snuff box. Van Buren took a pinch, bowed to Clay, and left the chamber, both deflating the effect of Clays remarks and preventing tension from escalating, as would have happened if Van Buren had attempted to reply directly. Presidential election of 1836 1836 electoral vote results Jackson, not running in 1836, was determined to make Van Buren his successor in order to continue the Jackson administrations policies. This conclusion on Jacksons part soon became public. When the Democratic Convention met in Baltimore, Maryland in May, 1835, 18 months before the election, the delegates nominated Van Buren unanimously. Two names were put forward for the vicepresidential nomination Representative Richard M. Johnson of Kentucky, and former senator William Cabell Rives of Virginia. Southern Democrats, and Van Buren himself, strongly preferred Rives. Jackson, on the other hand, strongly preferred Johnson. Again, Jacksons considerable influence prevailed, however, Johnson received the required twothirds vote only after New York Senator Silas Wright prevailed upon nondelegate Edward Rucker to cast the 15 votes of the absent Tennessee delegation in his favor. On the issue of slavery, Van Buren moved to obtain the support of southerners by assuring them that he opposed abolitionism and supported the maintaining of slavery in states where it had already existed. Regarding the national bank, Van Buren made clear that he opposed rechartering a national bank. To demonstrate consistency regarding his opinions on slavery, Van Buren cast the tiebreaking Senate vote in favor of engrossing a bill to subject abolitionist mail to state laws, thus ensuring that its circulation would be prohibited in the South. Martin Van Burens competitors in the election of 1836 were three members of the newly established Whig Party. Still a loose coalition bound by mutual opposition to Jacksons antibank policies but lacking the party unity or organizational strength to field a single ticket or define a coherent platform, the Whigs ran several regional candidates in hopes of sending the election to the House of Representatives, where each state delegation would have one vote and the Whigs would stand a better chance of winning. They were Hugh White of Tennessee, Daniel Webster of Massachusetts, and William Henry Harrison of Indiana. Besides endorsing internal improvements and a national bank, the Whigs tried to tie Democrats to abolitionism and sectional tension, and attacked Jackson for acts of aggression and usurpation of power. The Whigs nominated New York AntiMason Francis Granger and former Democrat John Tyler of Virginia for vice president. Richard Johnson, Van Burens running mate, was a hero of the War of 1812, and claimed to have killed Tecumseh at the Battle of the Thames. Since Harrison was campaigning for president as the hero of Tippecanoe, Johnsons friends countered with Van Buren won the election with 764,198 popular votes, only 50.9 percent of the total, and 170 electoral votes. Harrison led the Whigs with 73 electoral votes, White receiving 26 and Webster 14. Willie P. Mangum of South Carolina received his state s 11 electoral votes. Van Burens victory resulted from a combination of his own attractive political and personal qualities, Jacksons popularity and endorsement, the organizational power of the Democratic party, and the inability of the Whig Party at this point to muster an effective candidate and campaign. Johnson, however, received only 147 electoral votes, 70 more than his closest contender, Francis Granger, but one less than the number required to elect. Virginias electors had remained loyal to Van Buren, who carried the state by a close margin, but instead, they all refused to vote for Johnson. Van Buren was the first president to be born after the United States Declaration of Independence from the Kingdom of Great Britain. On February 8, 1837, the U.S. Senate convened, and in accordance with the Twelfth Amendment chose the vice president from the two top electoral vote recipients, Johnson, and Granger. Johnson won the contingent vote, 3317, and became the nations ninth vice president. Presidency 1837 1841 White House hostess For the first half of his presidency, Van Buren, who had been a widower for many years, did not have a specific person fill the role of White House hostess at administration social events, but tried to assume such duties himself. When his eldest son Abraham Van Buren married Angelica Singleton in 1838, he quickly acted to install his daughterinlaw as his hostess. She solicited the advice of her distant relative, Dolley Madison, who had moved back to Washington after her husbands death, and soon the presidents parties livened up. After the 1839 New Years Eve reception, the Boston Post raved Van Buren is a lady of rare accomplishments, very modest yet perfectly easy and graceful in her manners and free and vivacious in her conversation ... universally admired. As the nation endured a deep economic depression, Angelica van Burens receiving style at receptions was influenced by her heavy reading on European court life . Newspaper coverage of this, in addition to the claim that she intended to relandscape the White House grounds to resemble the royal gardens of Europe, was used in a political attack on her fatherinlaw by a Pennsylvania Whig Congressman Charles Ogle. He referred obliquely to her as part of the presidential household in his famous Gold Spoon Oration. The attack was delivered in Congress and the depiction of the President as living a royal lifestyle was a primary factor in his defeat for reelection. Panic of 1837 The modern balaam and his ass , an 1837 caricature placing the blame for the Panic of 1837 and the perilous state of the banking system on outgoing President Andrew Jackson, shown riding a donkey, while President Martin Van Buren comments approvingly. When Van Buren entered office, the nations economic health had taken a turn for the worse and the prosperity of the early 1830s was over. Two months into his presidency, on May 10, 1837, some important state banks in New York, running out of hard currency reserves, refused to convert paper money into gold or silver, and other financial institutions throughout the nation quickly followed suit. This financial crisis would become known as the Panic of 1837. The Panic was followed by a fiveyear depression in which banks failed and unemployment reached record highs.W. J. Rorabaugh, Donald T. Critchlow, Paula C. Baker . Americas promise a concise history of the United States . Rowman Littlefield. p.210. Van Buren blamed the economic collapse on greedy American and foreign business and financial institutions, as well as the overextension of credit by U.S. banks. Whig leaders in Congress blamed the Democrats, along with Andrew Jacksons economic policies, specifically his 1836 Specie Circular. Cries of rescind the circular went up and former President Jackson sent word to Van Buren asking him not to rescind the order, believing that it had to be given enough time to work. Others, like Nicholas Biddle, believed that Jacksons dismantling of the Bank of the United States was directly responsible for the irresponsible creation of paper money by the state banks which had precipitated this panic. To deal with the crisis, the Whigs proposed rechartering the national bank. The president countered by proposing the establishment of an independent U.S. treasury, which would take the politics out of the nations money supply the government would hold all of its money balances in the form of gold or silver and would be restricted from printing paper money at will, a measure designed to prevent inflation. Van Buren announced his proposal in September 1837 but that was too much for state banking interests, and an alliance of conservative Democrats and Whigs prevented it from becoming law until 1840. The independent treasury lasted only one year the Whigs, who won a congressional majority and the presidency in the 1840 elections, promptly repealed the law. By the time Congress finally acted, the nations economy had been mired in a depression for nearly four years the problems would continue into the early 1840s. More important for Van Burens immediate future, the depression would be a major issue in his upcoming reelection campaign. Indian removals In 1838, Van Buren directed General Winfield Scott to forcibly institute the removal of all those Cherokee who had not complied with the 1835 Treaty of New Echota by departing from the Southeastern United States and moving west . The Cherokee were herded violently into internment camps, where they were kept for the summer of 1838. The actual transportation west was delayed by intense heat and drought, but in the fall, the Cherokee reluctantly agreed to transport themselves west. During the Cherokee removal, part of the Trail of Tears, some 20,000 people were involuntarily relocated. In the course of Van Burens presidency the federal government negotiated 19 treaties with Indian nations. The administration also contended with the Seminole in Florida, who engaged the army in a sevenyear battle. Known as the Second Seminole War, the battle began in 1835 during Jacksons presidency. Fighting was not resolved until 1842, after Van Buren had left office. It is regarded as the longest and most costly of the nations Indian conflicts. Mormons In 1839, Joseph Smith, Jr., the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, visited Van Buren to plead for the U.S. to help roughly 20,000 Mormon settlers of Independence, Missouri The Governor of Missouri, Lilburn Boggs, had issued an executive order on October 27, 1838, known as the Extermination Order. It authorized troops to use force against Mormons to exterminate or drive them from the state.Boggs, Extermination Order In 1839, after moving to Illinois, Smith and his party appealed to members of Congress and to President Van Buren to intercede for the Mormons. According to Smiths grandnephew, Van Buren said to Smith, Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you if I take up for you I shall lose the vote of Missouri. Texas In a bold step, Van Buren reversed Andrew Jacksons policies and sought peace at home, as well as abroad. Instead of settling a financial dispute between American citizens and the Mexican government by force, Van Buren wanted to seek a diplomatic solution. In an action that upset political leaders of the proslavery states, in August 1837, Van Buren denied Texas formal request to join the United States, partly to prevent the upset of the slave statefree state balance in the Missouri Compromise, and partly because he hoped to avoid a possible war with Mexico over Texas annexation. British North America British subjects in Lower Canada and Upper Canada rose in rebellion in 1837 and 1838 respectively, protesting their lack of responsible government. The rebellion in Upper Canada was led by William Lyon Mackenzie and Charles Duncombe. Destruction of the Caroline , illustration by John Charles Dent While the initial insurrection in Upper Canada ended quickly , many of the rebels fled across the Niagara River into New York, where Mackenzie began recruiting volunteers in Buffalo. On December 13, Mackenzie declared establishment of the Republic of Canada and put into motion a plan whereby volunteers would invade Upper Canada from Navy Island on the Canadian side of the Niagara River. Several hundred volunteers procured the steamboat Caroline to deliver supplies and arms to Navy Island from Fort Schlosser. To deter an imminent invasion, British forces crossed to the American bank of the river, where they burned and sank the ship. When an American was killed and others wounded, considerable sentiment arose within the United States to declare war, and a British ship was burned in revenge. Soon afterward, Mackenzie s republic collapsed, and the rebels withdrew into the U.S. the initial uprising in Lower Canada by then collapsed as well. Van Buren, looking to avoid a war with Great Britain, sent General Winfield Scott to the border with broad discretionary powers for its protection and its peace. Scott impressed upon American citizens the need for a peaceful resolution to the crisis, and made it clear that the U.S. government would not support adventuresome Americans attacking the British. Also, in early January 1838, the president proclaimed U.S. neutrality with regard to the Canadian independence issue, a declaration which Congress endorsed by passing a neutrality law discouraging the participation of American citizens in foreign conflicts. Simultaneously Charles Duncombe and Robert Nelson helped foment a largely American militia, the Hunters LodgeFrres chasseurs, which carried out several attacks in Upper Canada between December 1837 and December 1838, collectively known as the Patriot War. The administration followed through on its enforcement of the Neutrality Act, encouraged the prosecution of filibusters, and actively deterred U.S. citizens from subversive activities abroad. In the long term, the Patriot War contributed to the construction of healthy Anglo American and U.S. Canadian relationships in the 20th century it also led, more immediately, to a backlash among citizens against the overreach of federal authority, which hurt congressional Democrats in the 1838 midterm elections. Another crisis surfaced in late 1838, in the disputed territory on the Maine New Brunswick frontier, where Americans were settling on disputed land claimed by the United States and Great Britain. Both American and New Brunswick lumberjacks cut timber in the disputed territory during the winter of 1838 39. On December 29, New Brunswick lumbermen were spotted cutting down trees on an American s estate near the Aroostook River. American woodcutters rushed to stand guard. A shouting match, known as the Battle of Caribou, ensued. Tensions quickly boiled over into a near war with both Maine and New Brunswick arresting each others citizens. The crisis seemed ready to turn into an armed conflict. British troops began to gather on the Saint John River. The American press clamored for war Maine and her soil, or BLOOD screamed one editorial. Let the sword be drawn and the scabbard thrown away Congress authorized 50,000 troops and a 10 million budget. To settle the crisis, Van Buren met with the British minister to the United States. They agreed to resolve the border issue diplomatically. Van Buren also sent General Scott to the northern border area to show military resolve and more importantly to lower the tensions. Scott successfully convinced all sides to submit the border issue to arbitration. The dispute was put to rest a few years later, with the signing of the 1842 Webster Ashburton Treaty. United States v. The Amistad The Amistad case was a freedom suit that involved international issues and parties, as well as United States law, resulting from the rebellion of Africans on board the Spanish schooner La Amistad in 1839,. United States v. The Amistad , Findlaw, accessed 30 March 2013 The Van Buren administration supported the Spanish governments demand that the ship and its cargo be turned over to them. When a Federal District Court judge ruled that the Africans were legally free and should be transported home, the administration appealed the case to the Supreme Court. In February 1840, former President John Quincy Adams argued passionately for the Africans right to freedom. Attorney General Henry D. Gilpin presented the government s case. In March 1841, the Supreme Court issued its final verdict the Amistad Africans were free people and should be allowed to return home. The unique nature of the case, people of color testifying in federal court, and being represented by prominent lawyers, heightened public interest in the saga, as did the participation of former president Adams. The Amistad case drew attention to the personal tragedies of slavery and attracted new support for the growing abolition movement in the North. It also transformed the courts into the principal forum for a national debate on the legal foundations of slavery. Cabinet Portrait of Martin Van Buren Martin Van Buren announced his intention to follow in the footsteps of his illustrious predecessor, and retained all but one of Jacksons cabinet. Judicial appointments Van Buren appointed two Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States John McKinleyconfirmed September 25, 1837 Peter Vivian Danielconfirmed March 2, 1841 Van Buren also appointed eight other federal judges, all to United States district courts. Midterm elections of 1838 The Panic of 1837 loomed large over the 1838 election cycle, as the carryover effects of the economic downturn led to Whig gains in both the U.S. House and Senate. Also, while the Democratic Party retained a majority in both chambers, a split among House Democrats led to Whig Congressman Robert M. T. Hunter being elected Speaker of the House for the 26th Congress. Likewise, state elections in 1837 and 1838 were disastrous for the Democrats, and the partial economic recovery in 1838 was offset by a second commercial crisis later that year. Presidential election of 1840 1840 electoral vote results Van Buren easily won renomination for a second term at the 1840 Democratic National Convention, but he and his party faced a difficult election in 1840. Van Burens presidency had been problematic, with the U.S. economy mired in a severe downturn also of concern were several divisive issues slavery, western expansion, and tensions with Great Britain that provided opportunities for Van Burens political opponents, and even some fellow Democrats to criticize him. Although Van Burens renomination was never in doubt, Democratic strategists began to question the wisdom of keeping Johnson on the ticket. Even former president Jackson conceded that Johnson was a liability and insisted on former House Speaker James K. Polk of Tennessee as Van Burens new running mate. With William Henry Harrison, Johnsons former commander and comradeinarms and the Hero of Tippecanoe, emerging as a likely Whig presidential contender, Van Buren was reluctant to drop the Democrats own hero from the ticket. The convention decided to allow state Democratic Party leaders to select the vicepresidential candidates for their states. The Whigs did select Harrison as their nominee, and presented him to the nation as the antithesis of the president, whom they derided as ineffective, corrupt, and effete. Van Buren was blamed for the hard economic times, and ridiculed as Martin Van Ruin. Van Burens rather elegant personal style was also an easy target for Whig attacks, such as the Gold Spoon Oration. Van Buren remained optimistic about his chances for reelection until October 1840, by which time it became unlikely that he would defeat Harrison. An astonishing 80 percent of eligible voters went to the polls on election day. Harrison won by a popular vote of 1,275,612 to 1,130,033, and an electoral vote margin of 234 to 60. Additionally, Whigs won majorities for the first time in both the U.S. House and the Senate. A linguistic legacy of the 1840 campaign was attributed to Van Buren himself the expression OK. Although some language experts attribute OK to other proposed origins, including words from the Choctaw or Wolof languages, and others to an abbreviation of oll korrect, misspellings attributed to Andrew Jackson, the prevailing opinion is that it derives from O ld K inderhook, one of the many nicknames for Van Buren. The first recorded use of OK in the sense of approval dates back to 1839 when a newspaper referred to a Democratic meeting of the roarers, the buttenders, ringtails and OKs, adding, the allusion was probably to those who put their OK on the nomination of Van Buren. Later life 1858 portrait by GPA Healy, on display at the White House On the expiration of his term, Van Buren returned to his estate, Lindenwald in Kinderhook, where he planned his return to the White House. He seemed likely to be nominated by the Democrats in 1844, but in April of that year a Van Buren letter to William H. Hammett was made public. In it, Van Buren opposed the immediate annexation of Texas, but said that he would support annexation once the state of war between Texas and Mexico was resolved. Van Burens opposition to immediate annexation cost him the support of proslavery Democrats he began the Democratic National Convention with a majority of the delegates, but with no southern support he could not reach the twothirds threshold required for nomination. His name was withdrawn after eight ballots, and a dark horse, James K. Polk, received the nomination and went on to win the presidency. After taking office, Polk used George Bancroft as an intermediary to offer Van Buren the ambassadorship to London. Van Buren declined, partly because he was upset with Polk over the treatment the Van Buren delegates had received at the 1844 convention, and partly because he was content in his retirement.Cole, p. 405 While in the State Senate Van Buren voted for a resolution instructing New Yorks members of Congress to vote against the admission of Missouri as a slave state. However, despite these antislavery views, during his term of office there was no ambiguity about his position on the abolition of slavery.Robin Santos Doak . The Historical encyclopedia of world slavery . Compass Point Books. p.22. He actually considered slavery immoral, but sanctioned by the Constitution. Consequently, Van Buren believed he had no choice but to oppose any attempt on the part of Congress to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia against the wishes of the slaveholding States, and to resist the slightest interference with it in the states where it existed. After leaving the White House, Van Buren grew increasingly opposed to slavery, and his earlier views about its constitutional standing gave way over time to acceptance of antislavery positions including opposing slaverys expansion into newly organized western states. In 1848, he was nominated for president by two minor parties, first by the Barnburner faction of the Democratic Party in New York, then by the Free Soil Party, with whom the Barnburners coalesced. The Barnburners and Free Soilers opposed Democratic nominee Lewis Cass, who opposed the Wilmot Proviso and was otherwise seen as friendly to slavery. In addition, Van Buren, who had been denied the 1844 nomination by Cass supporters despite having begun the convention with a majority of delegates, may have run in order to exact a measure of revenge by denying Cass the presidency. Van Buren won no electoral votes, but finished second to Whig nominee Zachary Taylor in New York, taking enough votes from Cass to give the state and perhaps the election to Taylor. Daguerreotype of Martin Van Buren, circa 1855 Unlike many antislavery Democrats of the 1840s and 1850s, who later joined the Republican Party, Van Buren and most of his followers remained in the Democratic fold, including his son John Van Buren and Samuel J. Tilden, who later served as Governor of New York and was the Democratic nominee for President in 1876. Van Buren supported Franklin Pierce for President in 1852, and James Buchanan in 1856, though he later opposed the Buchanan administrations efforts to accommodate the southern states when they threatened secession. In the election of 1860, he supported Stephen A. Douglas, the candidate of northern Democrats, and helped create a fusion ticket in New York of Democratic electors pledged to both Douglas and John C. Breckinridge, but Abraham Lincoln carried New York and every northern state except New Jersey. Once the American Civil War began, Van Buren made public his support for the Union, and supported Abraham Lincolns efforts to prevent the southern states from seceding. In April 1861, former President Pierce wrote to the other living former Presidents and asked them to consider meeting in order to use their stature and influence to propose a negotiated end to the war. Pierce asked Van Buren to use his role as the senior living exPresident to issue a formal call. Van Burens reply suggested that Buchanan should be the one to call the meeting, since he was the former President who had served most recently, or that Pierce should issue the call himself if he strongly believed in the merit of his proposal. Neither Buchanan nor Pierce was willing to make Pierces proposal public, and nothing more resulted from it. Van Burens health began to fail later in 1861, and he was bedridden with pneumonia during the fall and winter of 1861 62. He did not recover, and died of bronchial asthma and heart failure at his Lindenwald estate in Kinderhook at 200a.m. on July 24, 1862, at the age of 79. He is buried in the Kinderhook Reformed Dutch Church Cemetery, as are his wife Hannah, his parents, and his son Martin Van Buren, Jr. Memorials and popular culture Van Burens home in Kinderhook, New York, which he called Lindenwald, is now the Martin Van Buren National Historic Site. Counties are named for Van Buren in Michigan, Iowa, Arkansas, and Tennessee. During the 1988 presidential campaign, George H. W. Bush, a Yale University graduate and member of the Skull and Bones secret society, was attempting to become the first incumbent Vice President to win election to the presidency since Van Buren. In the comic strip Doonesbury artist Garry Trudeau depicted members of Skull and Bones as attempting to rob Van Burens grave, apparently intending to use the relics in a ritual that would aid Bush in the election. On the television show Seinfeld , the episode The Van Buren Boys is about a fictional street gang that admires Van Buren and bases its rituals and symbols on him, including the hand sign of eight fingers pointing up. Eight fingers signifies Van Buren, the eighth President. Martin Van Buren was portrayed by Nigel Hawthorne in the 1997 film Amistad . The film depicts the controversy and legal battle surrounding the status of slaves who in 1839 rebelled against their transporters on La Amistad slave ship. In Episode 1 Season 2 of Veep , Vice President Selina Meyer is told that a colleagues office is opposite the picture of Fat Wolverine. In the next scene the picture is revealed to be of Martin Van Buren. In an early scene of the film Two Faces of January , the main characters American expatriates in Athens encounter an American tourist and discover that she is a Van Buren descendant. They then argue over whether Martin Van Buren was the seventh or eighth President. The USS Van Buren is a fictional Navy aircraft carrier named for President Van Buren which has appeared in the television show NCIS Los Angeles . See also American election campaigns in the 19th century Charlotte Dupuy, slave who worked for Van Buren at Decatur House, while her suit for freedom against Henry Clay proceeded List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience List of Presidents of the United States who owned slaves U.S. Presidents on U.S. postage stamps References Sources Further reading Books by Van Buren These were published posthumously Books about Van Buren External links White House biography Martin Van Buren A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress The Papers of Martin Van Buren at Cumberland University American President Martin Van Buren at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia Inaugural Address , at the Miller Center Martin Van Buren National Historic Site , National Park Service Life Portrait of Martin Van Buren, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , May 3, 1999 Category1782 births Category1862 deaths CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryVice Presidents of the United States Category18thcentury American people Category18thcentury Calvinist and Reformed Christians Category19thcentury American diplomats Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury Calvinist and Reformed Christians CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to the United Kingdom CategoryAmerican members of the Dutch Reformed Church CategoryAmerican people of Dutch descent CategoryBurials in New York CategoryClaverack College alumni CategoryDeaths from asthma CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryDemocratic Party vice presidential nominees CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party state governors of the United States CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party United States Senators CategoryGovernors of New York CategoryJackson administration cabinet members CategoryNew York DemocraticRepublicans CategoryNew York Democrats CategoryNew York Free Soilers CategoryNew York State Attorneys General CategoryNew York State Senators CategoryPeople from Kinderhook, New York CategoryReformed Church in America members CategoryAmerican slave owners CategoryUnited States Secretaries of State CategoryUnited States Senators from New York CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1836 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1840 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1844 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1848 CategoryUnited States presidential electors, 1820 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1824 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1832 CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law CategoryVan Buren family
The President of the United States The terms POTUS originated in the Phillips Code, a shorthand method created in 1879 by Walter P. Phillips for the rapid transmission of press reports by telegraph. is the head of state and head of government of the United States of America. He directs the executive branch of the federal government and is the commanderinchief of the United States Armed Forces. The U.S. President is considered to be the worlds most powerful political figure, as the leader of the only contemporary global superpower. The role includes being responsible of the worlds most expensive military with the second largest nuclear arsenal and leading the nation with the largest economy by nominal GDP. The presidency holds significant hard and soft power both domestically and abroad. In ordering the three branches of government, Article II of the Constitution vests the executive power of the United States in the president. The power includes the execution and enforcement of federal law, alongside the responsibility of appointing federal executive, diplomatic, regulatory and judicial officers, and concluding treaties with foreign powers with the advice and consent of the Senate. The president is further empowered to grant federal pardons and reprieves, and to convene and adjourn either or both houses of Congress under extraordinary circumstances. The president is largely responsible for dictating the legislative agenda of the party to which the president is a member. The president also directs the foreign and domestic policy of the United States. In addition, Article One of the United States Constitution assigns to the president the power to sign legislation into law or to veto it. Since the office of President was established in 1789, its power has grown substantially, as has the power of the federal government as a whole.The Influence of State Politics in Expanding Federal Power, Henry Jones Ford, Proceedings of the American Political Science Association, Vol. 5, Fifth Annual Meeting . Retrieved March 17, 2010. The president is indirectly elected by the people through the Electoral College to a fouryear term, and is one of only two nationally elected federal officers, the other being the Vice President of the United States., The White House. Nine vice presidents became president by virtue of a presidents intraterm death or resignation.The nine vice presidents who succeeded to the presidency upon their predecessors death or resignation and finishedout that unexpired term are John Tyler Millard Fillmore Andrew Johnson Chester A. Arthur Theodore Roosevelt Calvin Coolidge Harry S. Truman Lyndon B. Johnson and Gerald Ford . The Twentysecond Amendment prohibits anyone from being elected president for a third term. It also prohibits a person from being elected to the presidency more than once if that person previously had served as president, or acting president, for more than two years of another persons term as president. In all, 44 individuals have served 45 presidencies spanning 57 full fouryear terms.. Grover Cleveland served two nonconsecutive terms, so he is counted twice as the 22nd and 24th presidents. Incumbent Donald Trump was elected on Tuesday, November 8, 2016. The next presidential election will be held on Tuesday, November 3, 2020. Origin In 1776, the Thirteen Colonies, acting through the Second Continental Congress, declared political independence from Great Britain during the American Revolution. The new states, though independent of each other as nation states, recognized the necessity of closely coordinating their efforts against the British. Desiring to avoid anything that remotely resembled a monarchy, Congress negotiated the Articles of Confederation to establish an alliance between the states. As a central authority, Congress under the Articles was without any legislative power it could make its own resolutions, determinations, and regulations, but not any laws, nor any taxes or local commercial regulations enforceable upon citizens. This institutional design reflected how Americans believed the deposed British system of Crown and Parliament ought to have functioned with respect to the royal dominion a superintending body for matters that concerned the entire empire. Out from under any monarchy, the states assigned some formerly royal prerogatives to Congress, while severally lodging the rest within their own respective state governments. Only after all the states agreed to a resolution settling competing western land claims did the Articles take effect on March 1, 1781, when Maryland became the final state to ratify them. In 1783, the Treaty of Paris secured independence for each of the former colonies. With peace at hand, the states each turned toward their own internal affairs. By 1786, Americans found their continental borders besieged and weak and their respective economies in crises as neighboring states agitated trade rivalries with one another. They witnessed their hard currency pouring into foreign markets to pay for imports, their Mediterranean commerce preyed upon by North African pirates, and their foreignfinanced Revolutionary War debts unpaid and accruing interest. Civil and political unrest loomed. Following the successful resolution of commercial and fishing disputes between Virginia and Maryland at the Mount Vernon Conference in 1785, Virginia called for a trade conference between all the states, set for September 1786 in Annapolis, Maryland, with an aim toward resolving furtherreaching interstate commercial antagonisms. When the convention failed for lack of attendance due to suspicions among most of the other states, Alexander Hamilton led the Annapolis delegates in a call for a convention to offer revisions to the Articles, to be held the next spring in Philadelphia. Prospects for the next convention appeared bleak until James Madison and Edmund Randolph succeeded in securing George Washingtons attendance to Philadelphia as a delegate for Virginia. When the Constitutional Convention convened in May 1787, the 12 state delegations in attendance brought with them an accumulated experience over a diverse set of institutional arrangements between legislative and executive branches from within their respective state governments. Most states maintained a weak executive without veto or appointment powers, elected annually by the legislature to a single term only, sharing power with an executive council, and countered by a strong legislature. New York offered the greatest exception, having a strong, unitary governor with veto and appointment power elected to a threeyear term, and eligible for reelection to an indefinite number of terms thereafter. It was through the closeddoor negotiations at Philadelphia that the presidency framed in the U.S. Constitution emerged. Powers and duties Article I legislative role President Ronald Reagan signing the Martin Luther King bill in 1983. The first power the Constitution confers upon the president is the veto. The Presentment Clause requires that any bill passed by Congress to be presented to the president before it can become law. Once the legislation has been presented, the president has three options Sign the legislation within ten days, excluding Sundaysthe bill becomes law. Veto the legislation within the above timeframe and return it to the house of Congress in which it originated, expressing any objectionsthe bill does not become law, unless both houses of Congress vote to override the veto by a twothirds vote. Take no action on the legislation within the above timeframethe bill becomes law, as if the president had signed it, unless Congress by their adjournment prevents its return, in which case a it does not become law . In 1996, Congress attempted to enhance the presidents veto power with the Line Item Veto Act. The legislation empowered the president to sign any spending bill into law while simultaneously striking certain spending items within the bill, particularly any new spending, any amount of discretionary spending, or any new limited tax benefit. Congress could then repass that particular item. If the president then vetoed the new legislation, Congress could override the veto by its ordinary means, a twothirds vote in both houses. In Clinton v. City of New York , , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled such a legislative alteration of the veto power to be unconstitutional. Article II executive powers War and foreign affairs powers Abraham Lincoln, the 16th President of the United States, successfully preserved the Union during the American Civil War Perhaps the most important of all presidential powers is the command of the United States Armed Forces as its commanderinchief. While the power to declare war is constitutionally vested in Congress, the president has ultimate responsibility for direction and disposition of the military. The presentday operational command of the Armed Forces is normally exercised through the Secretary of Defense, with assistance of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to the Combatant Commands, as outlined in the presidentially approved Unified Command Plan .Joint Chiefs of Staff. About the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Retrieved February 25, 2013. The framers of the Constitution took care to limit the presidents powers regarding the military Alexander Hamilton explains this in Federalist No. 69 Congress, pursuant to the War Powers Resolution, must authorize any troop deployments longer than 60 days, although that process relies on triggering mechanisms that have never been employed, rendering it ineffectual. Additionally, Congress provides a check to presidential military power through its control over military spending and regulation. While historically presidents initiated the process for going to war, critics have charged that there have been several conflicts in which presidents did not get official declarations, including Theodore Roosevelts military move into Panama in 1903, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the invasions of Grenada in 1983 and Panama in 1990. Along with the armed forces, the president also directs U.S. foreign policy. Through the Department of State and the Department of Defense, the president is responsible for the protection of Americans abroad and of foreign nationals in the United States. The president decides whether to recognize new nations and new governments, and negotiates treaties with other nations, which become binding on the United States when approved by twothirds vote of the Senate. Administrative powers The president is the head of the executive branch of the federal government and is constitutionally obligated to take care that the laws be faithfully executed. The executive branch has over four million employees, including members of the military. Presidents make numerous executive branch appointments an incoming president may make up to 6,000 before taking office and 8,000 more while serving. Ambassadors, members of the Cabinet, and other federal officers, are all appointed by a president with the advice and consent of a majority of the Senate. When the Senate is in recess for at least ten days, the president may make recess appointments. National Labor Relations Board v. Noel Canning , 572 U.S. . Recess appointments are temporary and expire at the end of the next session of the Senate. The power of a president to fire executive officials has long been a contentious political issue. Generally, a president may remove purely executive officials at will. Shurtleff v. United States , Myers v. United States , . However, Congress can curtail and constrain a presidents authority to fire commissioners of independent regulatory agencies and certain inferior executive officers by statute. Humphreys Executor v. United States , and Morrison v. Olson , , respectively. The president additionally possesses the ability to direct much of the executive branch through executive orders that are grounded in federal law or constitutionally granted executive power. Executive orders are reviewable by federal courts and can be superseded by federal legislation and Supreme Courts decisions. To manage the growing federal bureaucracy, Presidents have gradually surrounded themselves with many layers of staff, who were eventually organized into the Executive Office of the President of the United States. Within the Executive Office, the Presidents innermost layer of aides are located in the White House Office. President also has unreviewable authority over the matters of immigration and can ban entry to the USA of foreign nationals who have no credible claim of a bona fide relationship with a person or entity in the United States at will. Washington v. Trump at 13 Juridical powers The president also has the power to nominate federal judges, including members of the United States courts of appeals and the Supreme Court of the United States. However, these nominations require Senate confirmation. Securing Senate approval can provide a major obstacle for presidents who wish to orient the federal judiciary toward a particular ideological stance. When nominating judges to U.S. district courts, presidents often respect the longstanding tradition of senatorial courtesy. Presidents may also grant pardons and reprieves , as is often done just before the end of a presidential term, but not without controversy. Historically, two doctrines concerning executive power have developed that enable the president to exercise executive power with a degree of autonomy. The first is executive privilege, which allows the president to withhold from disclosure any communications made directly to the president in the performance of executive duties. George Washington first claimed privilege when Congress requested to see Chief Justice John Jays notes from an unpopular treaty negotiation with Great Britain. While not enshrined in the Constitution, or any other law, Washingtons action created the precedent for the privilege. When Richard Nixon tried to use executive privilege as a reason for not turning over subpoenaed evidence to Congress during the Watergate scandal, the Supreme Court ruled in United States v. Nixon , , that executive privilege did not apply in cases where a president was attempting to avoid criminal prosecution. When President Bill Clinton attempted to use executive privilege regarding the Lewinsky scandal, the Supreme Court ruled in Clinton v. Jones , , that the privilege also could not be used in civil suits. These cases established the legal precedent that executive privilege is valid, although the exact extent of the privilege has yet to be clearly defined. Additionally, federal courts have allowed this privilege to radiate outward and protect other executive branch employees, but have weakened that protection for those executive branch communications that do not involve the president. President George W. Bush delivering the 2007 State of the Union Address, with Vice President Dick Cheney and Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi behind him The state secrets privilege allows the president and the executive branch to withhold information or documents from discovery in legal proceedings if such release would harm national security. Precedent for the privilege arose early in the 19th century when Thomas Jefferson refused to release military documents in the treason trial of Aaron Burr and again in Totten v. United States , when the Supreme Court dismissed a case brought by a former Union spy. However, the privilege was not formally recognized by the U.S. Supreme Court until United States v. Reynolds , where it was held to be a common law evidentiary privilege. Before the September 11 attacks, use of the privilege had been rare, but increasing in frequency. Since 2001, the government has asserted the privilege in more cases and at earlier stages of the litigation, thus in some instances causing dismissal of the suits before reaching the merits of the claims, as in the Ninth Circuits ruling in Mohamed v. Jeppesen Dataplan, Inc. Critics of the privilege claim its use has become a tool for the government to cover up illegal or embarrassing government actions. Legislative facilitator The Constitutions Ineligibility Clause prevents the President from simultaneously being a member of Congress. Therefore, the president cannot directly introduce legislative proposals for consideration in Congress. However, the president can take an indirect role in shaping legislation, especially if the presidents political party has a majority in one or both houses of Congress. For example, the president or other officials of the executive branch may draft legislation and then ask senators or representatives to introduce these drafts into Congress. The president can further influence the legislative branch through constitutionally mandated, periodic reports to Congress. These reports may be either written or oral, but today are given as the State of the Union address, which often outlines the presidents legislative proposals for the coming year. Additionally, the president may attempt to have Congress alter proposed legislation by threatening to veto that legislation unless requested changes are made. In the 20th century critics began charging that too many legislative and budgetary powers have slid into the hands of presidents that should belong to Congress. As the head of the executive branch, presidents control a vast array of agencies that can issue regulations with little oversight from Congress. One critic charged that presidents could appoint a virtual army of czars each wholly unaccountable to Congress yet tasked with spearheading major policy efforts for the White House. Presidents have been criticized for making signing statements when signing congressional legislation about how they understand a bill or plan to execute it. This practice has been criticized by the American Bar Association as unconstitutional. Conservative commentator George Will wrote of an increasingly swollen executive branch and the eclipse of Congress. According to Article II, Section 3, Clause 2 of the Constitution, the president may convene either or both houses of Congress. If both houses cannot agree on a date of adjournment, the president may appoint a date for Congress to adjourn. Ceremonial roles President Woodrow Wilson throwing out the ceremonial first ball on Opening Day, 1916 As head of state, the president can fulfill traditions established by previous presidents. William Howard Taft started the tradition of throwing out the ceremonial first pitch in 1910 at Griffith Stadium, Washington, D.C., on the Washington Senators Opening Day. Every president since Taft, except for Jimmy Carter, threw out at least one ceremonial first ball or pitch for Opening Day, the AllStar Game, or the World Series, usually with much fanfare. The President of the United States has served as the honorary president of the Boy Scouts of America since the founding of the organization. Other presidential traditions are associated with American holidays. Rutherford B. Hayes began in 1878 the first White House egg rolling for local children. Beginning in 1947 during the Harry S. Truman administration, every Thanksgiving the president is presented with a live domestic turkey during the annual National Thanksgiving Turkey Presentation held at the White House. Since 1989, when the custom of pardoning the turkey was formalized by George H. W. Bush, the turkey has been taken to a farm where it will live out the rest of its natural life. Presidential traditions also involve the presidents role as head of government. Many outgoing presidents since James Buchanan traditionally give advice to their successor during the presidential transition. Ronald Reagan and his successors have also left a private message on the desk of the Oval Office on Inauguration Day for the incoming president. During a state visit by a foreign head of state, the president typically hosts a State Arrival Ceremony held on the South Lawn, a custom begun by John F. Kennedy in 1961. This is followed by a state dinner given by the president which is held in the State Dining Room later in the evening. The modern presidency holds the president as one of the nations premier celebrities. Some argue that images of the presidency have a tendency to be manipulated by administration public relations officials as well as by presidents themselves. One critic described the presidency as propagandized leadership which has a mesmerizing power surrounding the office. Administration public relations managers staged carefully crafted photoops of smiling presidents with smiling crowds for television cameras. One critic wrote the image of John F. Kennedy was described as carefully framed in rich detail which drew on the power of myth regarding the incident of PT 109 and wrote that Kennedy understood how to use images to further his presidential ambitions. As a result, some political commentators have opined that American voters have unrealistic expectations of presidents voters expect a president to drive the economy, vanquish enemies, lead the free world, comfort tornado victims, heal the national soul and protect borrowers from hidden creditcard fees. Critics of presidencys evolution Most of the nations Founding Fathers expected the Congress, which was the first branch of government described in the Constitution, to be the dominant branch of government they did not expect a strong executive. However, presidential power has shifted over time, which has resulted in claims that the modern presidency has become too powerful, unchecked, unbalanced, and monarchist in nature. Critic Dana D. Nelson believes presidents over the past thirty years have worked towards undivided presidential control of the executive branch and its agencies. She criticizes proponents of the unitary executive for expanding the many existing uncheckable executive powers such as executive orders, decrees, memorandums, proclamations, national security directives and legislative signing statements that already allow presidents to enact a good deal of foreign and domestic policy without aid, interference or consent from Congress. Activist Bill Wilson opined that the expanded presidency was the greatest threat ever to individual freedom and democratic rule. Selection process George Washington, the first President of the United States Eligibility Article II, Section 1, Clause 5 of the Constitution sets the following qualifications for holding the presidency be a naturalborn citizen of the United StatesForeignborn American citizens who met the age and residency requirements at the time the Constitution was adopted were also eligible for the presidency. However, this allowance has since become obsolete. be at least thirtyfive years old be a resident in the United States for at least fourteen years. A person who meets the above qualifications is still disqualified from holding the office of president under any of the following conditions Under the Twentysecond Amendment, no person can be elected president more than twice. The amendment also specifies that if any eligible person serves as president or acting president for more than two years of a term for which some other eligible person was elected president, the former can only be elected president once. Scholars disagree over whether a person precluded by the Twentysecond Amendment to being elected president is also precluded from being vice president.See alternatively, see Under Article I, Section 3, Clause 7, upon conviction in impeachment cases, the Senate has the option of disqualifying convicted individuals from holding federal office, including that of president.See GPO Annotated U.S. Constitution, 2002 Ed. , at 611 nn. 772 773. Under Section 3 of the Fourteenth Amendment, no person who swore an oath to support the Constitution, and later rebelled against the United States, can become president. However, this disqualification can be lifted by a twothirds vote of each house of Congress. Campaigns and nomination The modern presidential campaign begins before the primary elections, which the two major political parties use to clear the field of candidates before their national nominating conventions, where the most successful candidate is made the partys nominee for president. Typically, the partys presidential candidate chooses a vice presidential nominee, and this choice is rubberstamped by the convention. The most common previous profession of U.S. presidents is lawyer.International Law, US Power The United States Quest for Legal Security, p 10, Shirley V. Scott 2012 Nominees participate in nationally televised debates, and while the debates are usually restricted to the Democratic and Republican nominees, third party candidates may be invited, such as Ross Perot in the 1992 debates. Nominees campaign across the country to explain their views, convince voters and solicit contributions. Much of the modern electoral process is concerned with winning swing states through frequent visits and mass media advertising drives. Election and oath Map of the United States showing the number of electoral votes allocated following the 2010 census to each state for the 2012, 2016 and 2020 presidential elections it also notes that Maine and Nebraska distribute electors by way of the Congressional District Method. 270 electoral votes are required for a majority out of 538 votes possible. The president is elected indirectly. A number of electors, collectively known as the Electoral College, officially select the president. On Election Day, voters in each of the states and the District of Columbia cast ballots for these electors. Each state is allocated a number of electors, equal to the size of its delegation in both Houses of Congress combined. Generally, the ticket that wins the most votes in a state wins all of that states electoral votes and thus has its slate of electors chosen to vote in the Electoral College. The winning slate of electors meet at its states capital on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December, about six weeks after the election, to vote. They then send a record of that vote to Congress. The vote of the electors is opened by the sitting vice president acting in that roles capacity as President of the Senate and read aloud to a joint session of the incoming Congress, which was elected at the same time as the president. Pursuant to the Twentieth Amendment, the presidents term of office begins at noon on January 20 of the year following the election. This date, known as Inauguration Day, marks the beginning of the fouryear terms of both the president and the vice president. Before executing the powers of the office, a president is constitutionally required to take the presidential oath Although not required, presidents have traditionally palmed a Bible while swearing the oath and have added, So help me God to the end of the oath. Further, although the oath may be administered by any person authorized by law to administer oaths, presidents are traditionally sworn in by the Chief Justice of the United States. Tenure and term limits Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected to four terms before the adoption of the Twentysecond Amendment in 1951. The term of office for president and vice president is four years. George Washington, the first president, set an unofficial precedent of serving only two terms. Before Franklin D. Roosevelt, Ulysses S. Grant and Theodore Roosevelt each unsuccessfully sought a third term. In 1940, Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected to a third term after being drafted by his party. In 1941, the United States entered World War II, leading voters to elect Roosevelt to a fourth term in 1944. Roosevelt died on April 12, 1945, 82 days into his fourth term. After the war, and in response to Roosevelt being elected to third and fourth terms, the Twentysecond Amendment was adopted. The amendment bars anyone from being elected president more than twice, or once if that person served more than half of another presidents term. Harry S. Truman, president when this amendment was adopted, was exempted from its limitations and briefly sought a third term before withdrawing from the 1952 election. Since the amendments adoption, five presidents have served two full terms Dwight D. Eisenhower, Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama. Jimmy Carter and George H. W. Bush sought a second term, but were defeated. Richard Nixon was elected to a second term, but resigned before completing it. Lyndon B. Johnson was the only president under the amendment to be eligible to serve more than two terms in total, having served for only fourteen months following John F. Kennedys assassination. However, Johnson withdrew from the 1968 Democratic Primary, surprising many Americans. Gerald Ford sought a full term, after serving out the last two years and five months of Nixons second term, but was not elected. Succession, vacancy, or disability Succession to or vacancies in the office of President may arise under several possible circumstances death, resignation, and removal from office. Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution allows for the removal of high federal officials, including the president, from office for treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Article I, Section 2, Clause 5 gives the House of Representatives the power to impeach such officials by a majority vote. Article I, Section 3, Clause 6 gives the Senate the power to remove impeached officials from office, given a twothirds vote to convict. The House has thus far impeached two presidents Andrew Johnson in 1868 and Bill Clinton in 1998. Neither was subsequently convicted by the Senate however, Johnson was acquitted by just one vote. Under Section 3 of the Twentyfifth Amendment, the president may transfer the presidential powers and duties to the vice president, who then becomes acting president, by transmitting a statement to the Speaker of the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate stating the reasons for the transfer. The president resumes the discharge of the presidential powers and duties upon transmitting, to those two officials, a written declaration stating that resumption. This transfer of power may occur for any reason the president considers appropriate in 2002 and again in 2007, President George W. Bush briefly transferred presidential authority to Vice President Dick Cheney. In both cases, this was done to accommodate a medical procedure that required Bush to be sedated both times, Bush returned to duty later the same day.Guardian, Bush colonoscopy leaves Cheney in charge, July 20, 2007. Under Section 4 of the Twentyfifth Amendment, the vice president, in conjunction with a majority of the Cabinet, may transfer the presidential powers and duties from the president to the vice president by transmitting a written declaration to the Speaker of the House and the president pro tempore of the Senate that the president is unable to discharge the presidential powers and duties. If this occurs, then the vice president will assume the presidential powers and duties as acting president however, the president can declare that no such inability exists and resume the discharge of the presidential powers and duties. If the vice president and Cabinet contest this claim, it is up to Congress, which must meet within two days if not already in session, to decide the merit of the claim. The United States Constitution mentions the resignation of the president, but does not regulate its form or the conditions for its validity. Pursuant to federal law, the only valid evidence of the presidents resignation is a written instrument to that effect, signed by the president and delivered to the office of the Secretary of State. This has only occurred once, when Richard Nixon delivered a letter to Henry Kissinger to that effect. Section 1 of the Twentyfifth Amendment states that the vice president becomes president upon the removal from office, death, or resignation of the preceding president. The Presidential Succession Act of 1947 provides that if the offices of President and Vice President are each either vacant or are held by a disabled person, the next officer in the presidential line of succession, the Speaker of the House, becomes acting president. The line then extends to the President pro tempore of the Senate, followed by every member of the Cabinet. A person must fulfill all eligibility requirements of the office of President to be eligible to become acting president ineligible individuals are skipped. Political affiliation Throughout most of its history, politics of the United States have been dominated by political parties. Political parties had not been anticipated when the U.S. Constitution was drafted in 1787, nor did they exist at the time of the first presidential election in 1788 1789. Organized political parties developed in the U.S. in the mid 1790s, but political factions, from which organized parties evolved, began to appear almost immediately after the Federal government came into existence. Those who supported the Washington administration were referred to as proadministration and would eventually form the Federalist Party, while those in opposition joined the emerging DemocraticRepublican Party. Greatly concerned about the very real capacity of political parties to destroy the fragile unity holding the nation together, Washington remained unaffiliated with any political faction or party throughout his eightyear presidency. He was, and remains, the only U.S. president never to be affiliated with a political party. Since George Washington, 43 persons have been sworn into office as President, and all have been affiliated with a political party at the time they assumed office. The number of presidents per political party are 19 with the Republican Party Chester A. Arthur, George H. W. Bush, George W. Bush, Calvin Coolidge, Dwight D. Eisenhower, Gerald Ford, James A. Garfield, Ulysses S. Grant, Warren G. Harding, Benjamin Harrison, Rutherford B. Hayes, Herbert Hoover, Abraham Lincoln, William McKinley, Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Donald Trump 14 with the Democratic Party James Buchanan, Jimmy Carter, Grover Cleveland, Bill Clinton, Andrew Jackson, Lyndon B. Johnson, John F. Kennedy, Barack Obama, Franklin Pierce, James K. Polk, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry S. Truman, Martin Van Buren, and Woodrow Wilson Four with the DemocraticRepublican Party John Quincy Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe Four with the Whig Party Millard Fillmore, William Henry Harrison, Zachary Taylor, and John Tyler One with the Federalist Party John Adams One with the National Union Party Andrew Johnson Compensation Presidential pay history Date established Salary Salary in 2016dollars September 24, 1789 25,000 702,755 March 3, 1873 50,000 1,032,868 March 4, 1909 75,000 2,045,483 January 19, 1949 100,000 1,008,433 January 20, 1969 200,000 1,307,940 January 20, 2001 400,000 542,082 SourcesRelative Value in US Dollars. Measuring Worth . Retrieved May 30, 2006.Dept. of Labor Inflation Calculator. Inflation Calculator . Retrieved August 10, 2009. Since 2001, the president has earned a 400,000 annual salary, along with a 50,000 annual expense account, a 100,000 nontaxable travel account, and 19,000 for entertainment.How much does the U.S. president get paid. Howstuffworks . Retrieved July 24, 2007.Salaries of Federal Officials A Fact Sheet . United States Senate website. Retrieved August 6, 2009. The most recent raise in salary was approved by Congress and President Bill Clinton in 1999 and went into effect in 2001. Residence The White House in Washington, D.C. serves as the official place of residence for the president. As well as access to the White House staff, facilities available to the president include medical care, recreation, housekeeping, and security services. The government pays for state dinners and other official functions, but the president pays for personal, family, and guest dry cleaning and food the high food bill often amazes new residents. Camp David, officially titled Naval Support Facility Thurmont, is a mountainbased military camp in Frederick County, Maryland, used as a country retreat and for high alert protection of the president and guests. Blair House, located next to the Eisenhower Executive Office Building at the White House Complex and Lafayette Park, is a complex of four connected townhouses exceeding of floor space that serves as the presidents official guest house and as a secondary residence for the president if needed. Travel For ground travel, the president uses the presidential state car, which is an armored limousine built on a heavily modified Cadillacbased chassis.New Presidential Limousine enters Secret Service Fleet U.S. Secret Service Press Release Retrieved on January 20, 2009. One of two identical Boeing VC25 aircraft, which are extensively modified versions of Boeing 747200B airliners, serve as long distance travel for the president and are referred to as Air Force One while the president is on board . Incountry trips are typically handled with just one of the two planes, while overseas trips are handled with both, one primary and one backup. Any civilian aircraft the President is aboard is designated Executive One for the flight.. White House Military Office. Retrieved June 17, 2007.Any U.S. Air Force aircraft carrying the president will use the call sign Air Force One. Similarly, Navy One, Army One, and Coast Guard One are the call signs used if the president is aboard a craft belonging to these services. Executive One becomes the call sign of any civilian aircraft when the president boards. The president also has access to a fleet of thirtyfive U.S. Marine Corps helicopters of varying models, designated Marine One when the president is aboard any particular one in the fleet. Flights are typically handled with as many as five helicopters all flying together and frequently swapping positions as to disguise which helicopter the President is actually aboard to any wouldbe threats. Protection The U.S. Secret Service is charged with protecting the sitting president and the first family. As part of their protection, presidents, first ladies, their children and other immediate family members, and other prominent persons and locations are assigned Secret Service codenames. The use of such names was originally for security purposes and dates to a time when sensitive electronic communications were not routinely encrypted today, the names simply serve for purposes of brevity, clarity, and tradition. FileWhite House lawn .tif The White House FileCamp David 1959.jpg Camp David FileBlair House daylight.jpg Blair House FileGPA0209 US SecretService press release 2009 Limousine Page 3 Image.jpg State car FileAir Force One over Mt. Rushmore.jpg Air Force One FileSikorsky VH3D Sea King 159356 .jpg Marine One Postpresidency The five living former presidents George H. W. Bush , Barack Obama , George W. Bush , Bill Clinton , and Jimmy Carter . Under the Former Presidents Act, all living former presidents are granted a pension, an office, and a staff. The pension has increased numerous times with Congressional approval. Retired presidents now receive a pension based on the salary of the current administrations cabinet secretaries, which was 199,700 each year in 2012. Former presidents who served in Congress may also collect congressional pensions. The act also provides former presidents with travel funds and franking privileges. Prior to 1997, all former presidents, their spouses, and their children until age 16 were protected by the Secret Service until the presidents death. In 1997, Congress passed legislation limiting secret service protection to no more than 10 years from the date a president leaves office. On January 10, 2013, President Obama signed legislation reinstating lifetime secret service protection for him, George W. Bush, and all subsequent presidents. A spouse who remarries is no longer eligible for secret service protection. Some presidents have had significant careers after leaving office. Prominent examples include William Howard Tafts tenure as Chief Justice of the United States and Herbert Hoovers work on government reorganization after World War II. Grover Cleveland, whose bid for reelection failed in 1888, was elected president again four years later in 1892. Two former presidents served in Congress after leaving the White House John Quincy Adams was elected to the House of Representatives, serving there for seventeen years, and Andrew Johnson returned to the Senate in 1875. John Tyler served in the provisional Congress of the Confederate States during the Civil War and was elected to the Confederate House of Representatives, but died before that body first met. Presidents may use their predecessors as emissaries to deliver private messages to other nations or as official representatives of the United States to state funerals and other important foreign events. Richard Nixon made multiple foreign trips to countries including China and Russia and was lauded as an elder statesman., The White House. Jimmy Carter has become a global human rights campaigner, international arbiter, and election monitor, as well as a recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize. Bill Clinton has also worked as an informal ambassador, most recently in the negotiations that led to the release of two American journalists, Laura Ling and Euna Lee, from North Korea. Clinton has also been active politically since his presidential term ended, working with his wife Hillary on her 2008 and 2016 presidential bids and President Obama on his 2012 reelection campaign. Presidential libraries 125px Since Herbert Hoover, each president has created a repository known as a presidential library for preserving and making available his papers, records, and other documents and materials. Completed libraries are deeded to and maintained by the National Archives and Records Administration the initial funding for building and equipping each library must come from private, nonfederal sources. There are currently thirteen presidential libraries in the NARA system. There are also presidential libraries maintained by state governments and private foundations and Universities of Higher Education, such as the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, which is run by the State of Illinois, the George W. Bush Presidential library and Museum, which is run by Southern Methodist University, the George H. W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum, which is run by Texas AM University, and the Lyndon Baines Johnson Presidential Library and Museum, which is run by the University of Texas at Austin. As many presidents live for many years after leaving office, several of them have personally overseen the building and opening of their own presidential libraries, some even making arrangements for their own burial at the site. Several presidential libraries therefore contain the graves of the president they document, including the Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood Home in Abilene, Kansas, Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum in Yorba Linda, California, and the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, California. These grave sites are open to the general public. Timeline of presidents See also Curse of Tippecanoe Imperial Presidency The Imperial Presidency Imperiled presidency List of United States presidential trips Mr. President President of the Continental Congress Presidential 1 Coin Program Presidential MMs Secondterm curse United States presidential line of succession in fiction Vice President of the United States White House Office Notes References Further reading Balogh, Brian and Bruce J. Schulman, eds. Recapturing the Oval Office New Historical Approaches to the American Presidency , 311 pp. Couch, Ernie. Presidential Trivia. Rutledge Hill Press. March 1, 1996. Lang, J. Stephen. The Complete Book of Presidential Trivia. Pelican Publishing. 2001. Greenberg, David. Republic of Spin An Inside History of the American Presidency . xx, 540 pp. Leo, Leonard Taranto, James Bennett, William J. Presidential Leadership Rating the Best and the Worst in the White House. Simon and Schuster. 2004. Presidential Studies Quarterly , published by Blackwell Synergy, is a quarterly academic journal on the presidency. Zwitczak, Wasilewska, Iwona. The Toughest Season in the White House The Rhetorical Presidency and the State of the Union Address, 1953 1992. PhD thesis. University of Helsinki, 2014. . Primary sources Waldman, Michael Stephanopoulos, George. My Fellow Americans The Most Important Speeches of Americas presidents, from George Washington to George W. Bush. Sourcebooks Trade. 2003. Jacobs, Ron. Interview with Joseph G. Peschek and William Grover, authors of The Unsustainable Presidency , a book offering an analysis of the role the US President plays in economics and politics External links Official Presidential histories A New Nation Votes American Election Returns, 1787 1825 Presidential election returns including town and county breakdowns Companion website for the CSPAN television series American presidents Life Portraits Collection of letters, portraits, photos, and other documents from the National Archives Collection of over 67,000 presidential documents The History Channel US Presidents Miscellaneous Article analyzing a presidents many hats Hauenstein Center for Presidential Studies. Educational site on the American presidency Listing of every Presidents occupations before and after becoming the Commander in Chief Brief histories of the Masonic careers of presidents who were members of the Freemasons PBS site on the American presidency Presidents of the United States Resource Guides from the Library of Congress Shapell Manuscript Foundation. Images of documents written by U.S. presidents Category1789 establishments in the UnitedStates
Ronald Wilson Reagan was an American politician and actor who served as the 40th President of the United States from 1981 to 1989. Before his presidency, he served as the 33rd Governor of California from 1967 to 1975, after a career as a Hollywood actor and union leader. Raised in a poor family in small towns of northern Illinois, Reagan graduated from Eureka College in 1932 and worked as a sports announcer on several regional radio stations. After moving to Hollywood in 1937, he became an actor and starred in a few major productions. Reagan was twice elected President of the Screen Actors Guild the labor union for actors where he worked to root out Communist influence. In the 1950s, he moved into television and was a motivational speaker at General Electric factories. Reagan had always been a Democrat until 1962 when he became a conservative and switched to the Republican Party. In 1964, Reagans speech, A Time for Choosing, supported Barry Goldwaters foundering presidential campaign and earned him national attention as a new conservative spokesman. Building a network of supporters, he was elected Governor of California in 1966. As governor, Reagan raised taxes, turned a state budget deficit to a surplus, challenged the protesters at the University of California, ordered National Guard troops in during a period of protest movements in 1969, and was reelected in 1970. He twice ran unsuccessfully for the Republican nomination for the U.S. presidency in 1968 and 1976 four years later, he easily won the nomination outright, becoming the oldest elected U.S. president up to that time, defeating incumbent Jimmy Carter in 1980. Entering the presidency in 1981, Reagan implemented sweeping new political and economic initiatives. His supplyside economic policies, dubbed Reaganomics, advocated tax rate reduction to spur economic growth, control of the money supply to curb inflation, economic deregulation, and reduction in government spending. In his first term he survived an assassination attempt, spurred the War on Drugs, and fought public sector labor. Over his two terms, the economy saw a reduction of inflation from 12.5 to 4.4, and an average annual growth of real GDP of 3.4 while Reagan did enact cuts in domestic discretionary spending, tax cuts and increased military spending contributed to increased federal outlays overall, even after adjustment for inflation. During his reelection bid, Reagan campaigned on the notion that it was Morning in America, winning a landslide in 1984 with the largest electoral college victory in American history. Foreign affairs dominated his second term, including ending of the Cold War, the bombing of Libya, and the Iran Contra affair. Publicly describing the Soviet Union as an evil empire, and during his famous speech at the Brandenburg Gate, President Reagan challenged Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev to tear down this wall. He transitioned Cold War policy from dtente to rollback, by escalating an arms race with the USSR while engaging in talks with Gorbachev, which culminated in the INF Treaty, shrinking both countries nuclear arsenals. Reagans presidency came during the decline of the Soviet Union and just ten months after the end of his term, the Berlin Wall fell, Germany reunified the following year, and on December 26, 1991, nearly three years after he left office, the Soviet Union collapsed. When Reagan left office in 1989, he held an approval rating of sixtyeight percent, matching those of Franklin D. Roosevelt, and later Bill Clinton, as the highest ratings for departing presidents in the modern era. He was the first president since Dwight D. Eisenhower to serve two full terms, after a succession of five prior presidents did not, some under unusual circumstances. Although he had planned an active postpresidency, Reagan disclosed in 1994 that he had been diagnosed with Alzheimers disease earlier that year. He appeared publicly for the last time at the funeral of Richard Nixon. He died ten years later in 2004 at the age of 93. Reagan had the thirdlongest life out of all the presidents, after Gerald Ford and George H. W. Bush. An icon among Republicans, he is viewed favorably in historian rankings of U.S. presidents, and his tenure constituted a realignment toward conservative policies in the U.S. Early life Ronald Wilson Reagan was born in an apartment on the second floor of a commercial building in Tampico, Illinois on February 6, 1911. He was the younger son of Nelle Clyde and John Edward Jack Reagan. Jack was a salesman and storyteller whose grandparents were Irish Catholic immigrants from County Tipperary,Terry Golway, Ronald Reagans America p. 1 while Nelle was of half English and half Scottish descent .Kengor, p. 4 Reagans older brother, John Neil Reagan , became an advertising executive. Reagans father nicknamed his son Dutch, due to his fat little Dutchmanlike appearance and Dutchboy haircut the nickname stuck with him throughout his youth. Reagans family briefly lived in several towns and cities in Illinois, including Monmouth, Galesburg, and Chicago. In 1919, they returned to Tampico and lived above the H. C. Pitney Variety Store until finally settling in Dixon. After his election as president, Reagan resided in the upstairs White House private quarters, and he would quip that he was living above the store again. According to Paul Kengor, author of God and Ronald Reagan , Reagan had a particularly strong faith in the goodness of people this faith stemmed from the optimistic faith of his motherKengor, p. 16 and the Disciples of Christ faith, into which he was baptized in 1922. For the time, Reagans opposition to racial discrimination was unusual. He recalled the time in Dixon when the proprietor of a local inn would not allow black people to stay there, and he brought them back to his house. His mother invited them to stay overnight and have breakfast the next morning.Kengor, p. 15 After the closure of the Pitney Store in late 1920 and the familys move to Dixon,Cannon , p. 2 the midwestern small universe had a lasting impression on Reagan.Reagan , p. 27 Education Reagan attended Dixon High School, where he developed interests in acting, sports, and storytelling.Brands, Reagan pp.12 5 His first job involved lifeguarding at the Rock River in Lowell Park in 1927. Over a sixyear period, Reagan reportedly performed 77 rescues as a lifeguard.Brands, Reagan pp.16 7 He attended Eureka College, a Disciplesoriented liberal arts school, where he became a member of the Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity, a cheerleader, and studied economics and sociology. While involved, the Miller Center of Public Affairs described him as an indifferent student. He majored in economics and sociology, and graduated with a C grade. He developed a reputation as a jack of all trades, excelling in campus politics, sports, and theater. He was a member of the football team and captain of the swim team. He was elected student body president and led a student revolt against the college president after the president tried to cut back the faculty.Cannon , p. 25 Entertainment career Radio and film The Bad Man After graduating from Eureka in 1932, Reagan drove to Iowa, where he held jobs as a radio announcer at several stations. He moved to WHO radio in Des Moines as an announcer for Chicago Cubs baseball games. His specialty was creating playbyplay accounts of games using as his source only basic descriptions that the station received by wire as the games were in progress.Brands, Reagan pp.24 31 While traveling with the Cubs in California, Reagan took a screen test in 1937 that led to a sevenyear contract with Warner Brothers studios.Brands, Reagan pp.35 41 He spent the first few years of his Hollywood career in the B film unit, where, Reagan joked, the producers didnt want them good they wanted them Thursday. His first screen credit was the starring role in the 1937 movie Love Is on the Air , and by the end of 1939 he had already appeared in 19 films, including Dark Victory with Bette Davis and Humphrey Bogart. Before the film Santa Fe Trail with Errol Flynn in 1940, he played the role of George The Gipper Gipp in the film Knute Rockne, All American from it, he acquired the lifelong nickname the Gipper.Cannon , p. 15 In 1941, exhibitors voted him the fifth most popular star from the younger generation in Hollywood. Reagan played his favorite acting role when he was a double amputee in 1942s Kings Row , in which he recites the line Wheres the rest of me later used as the title of his 1965 autobiography. Many film critics considered Kings Row to be his best movie, though the film was condemned by New York Times critic Bosley Crowther.Cannon , pp.56 7 Although Reagan called Kings Row the film that made me a star, he was unable to capitalize on his success because he was ordered to active duty with the U.S. Army at San Francisco two months after its release, and never regained star status in motion pictures. In the postwar era, after being separated from almost four years of World War II stateside service with the 1st Motion Picture Unit in December 1945, Reagan costarred in such films as, The Voice of the Turtle , John Loves Mary , The Hasty Heart , Bedtime for Bonzo , Cattle Queen of Montana , Tennessees Partner , Hellcats of the Navy , and the 1964 remake The Killers . Throughout his film career, his mother answered much of his fan mail.Skinner, et al. , p. 836 Military service Capt. Ronald Reagan at Fort Roach After completing 14 homestudy Army Extension Courses, Reagan enlisted in the Army Enlisted Reserve and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Officers Reserve Corps of the cavalry on May 25, 1937. On April 18, 1942, Reagan was ordered to active duty for the first time. Due to his poor eyesight, he was classified for limited service only, which excluded him from serving overseas. His first assignment was at the San Francisco Port of Embarkation at Fort Mason, California, as a liaison officer of the Port and Transportation Office. Upon the approval of the Army Air Force , he applied for a transfer from the cavalry to the AAF on May 15, 1942, and was assigned to AAF Public Relations and subsequently to the First Motion Picture Unit in Culver City, California. On January 14, 1943, he was promoted to first lieutenant and was sent to the Provisional Task Force Show Unit of This Is the Army at Burbank, California. He returned to the First Motion Picture Unit after completing this duty and was promoted to captain on July 22, 1943. In January 1944, Reagan was ordered to temporary duty in New York City to participate in the opening of the Sixth War Loan Drive, which campaigned for the purchase of war bonds. He was reassigned to the First Motion Picture Unit on November 14, 1944, where he remained until the end of World War II. He was recommended for promotion to major on February 2, 1945, but this recommendation was disapproved on July 17 of that year. While with the First Motion Picture Unit in 1945, he was indirectly involved in discovering actress Marilyn Monroe. He returned to Fort MacArthur, California, where he was separated from active duty on December 9, 1945. By the end of the war, his units had produced some 400 training films for the AAF. Reagan never left the United States during the war, but he kept a film reel that he obtained while he was in the service. The reel depicted the liberation of the Auschwitz concentration camp he believed that doubts would someday arise as to whether the Holocaust had occurred.Cannon, Lou , pp.486 490 It has been alleged that he was overheard telling Israeli foreign minister Yitzhak Shamir in 1983 that he had filmed that footage himself and helped liberate Auschwitz,Schaller, M., Reckoning with Reagan , New York Oxford University Press, 1992, p. 9 though this purported conversation was disputed by Secretary of State George P. Shultz.Shultz, George , p. 550 SAG presidency Guest stars for the premiere of The Dick Powell Show . Reagan stands behind, at the far left of the photograph Reagan was first elected to the Board of Directors of the Screen Actors Guild in 1941, serving as an alternate member. After World War II, he resumed service and became third vicepresident in 1946. The adoption of conflictofinterest bylaws in 1947 led the SAG president and six board members to resign Reagan was nominated in a special election for the position of president and was subsequently elected. He was chosen by the membership to serve seven additional oneyear terms, from 1947 to 1952 and in 1959. Reagan led the SAG through eventful years that were marked by labormanagement disputes, the Taft Hartley Act, the House UnAmerican Activities Committee hearings and the Hollywood blacklist era. Secret FBI informant in Hollywood During the late 1940s, Reagan and his thenwife, Jane Wyman, provided the FBI with names of actors within the motion picture industry whom they believed to be communist sympathizers. Though he expressed reservations, he said, Do they expect us to constitute ourselves as a little FBI of our own and determine just who is a Commie and who isnt Reagan testified before the House UnAmerican Activities Committee on the subject as well. A fervent anticommunist, he reaffirmed his commitment to democratic principles, stating, I never as a citizen want to see our country become urged, by either fear or resentment of this group, that we ever compromise with any of our democratic principles through that fear or resentment. Television Though an early critic of television, Reagan landed fewer film roles in the late 1950s and decided to join the medium. He was hired as the host of General Electric Theater , a series of weekly dramas that became very popular. His contract required him to tour General Electric plants 16 weeks out of the year, often demanding of him 14 speeches per day. He earned approximately 125,000 in this role. The show ran for 10 seasons from 1953 to 1962, which increased Reagans profile in American households. Previously, he had appeared in feature films mostly in supporting role or as a second lead. In his final work as a professional actor, Reagan was a host and performer from 1964 to 1965 on the television series Death Valley Days . Reagan and future wife Nancy Davis appeared together on television several times, including an episode of General Electric Theater in 1958 called A Turkey for the President.Reagan, American Icon. Metzger, Robert Paul. 1989. University of Pennsylvania. p. 26 Reagan appeared on the panel show Whats My Line twice, once as a mystery guest in 1953 and as a panelist in 1956. Marriages and children With first wife Jane Wyman, 1942 In 1938, Reagan costarred in the film Brother Rat with actress Jane Wyman . They were engaged at the Chicago Theatre, and married on January 26, 1940, at the Wee Kirk o the Heather church in Glendale, California. Together they had two biological children, Maureen and Christine , and adopted a third, Michael . After arguments about Reagans political ambitions, Wyman filed for divorce in 1948, citing a distraction due to her husbands Screen Actors Guild union duties the divorce was finalized in 1949. Wyman, who was a registered Republican, also stated that their breakup was due to a difference in politics . When Reagan became President 32 years later, he had the distinction of being the first divorced person to assume the nations highest office. Reagan and Wyman continued to be friends until his death, with Wyman voting for Reagan in both of his runs and, upon his death, saying America has lost a great president and a great, kind, and gentle man. Wedding of Ronald and Nancy Reagan, 1952. Matron of honor Brenda Marshall and best man William Holden were the sole guests Reagan met actress Nancy Davis in 1949 after she contacted him in his capacity as president of the Screen Actors Guild. He helped her with issues regarding her name appearing on a Communist blacklist in Hollywood. She had been mistaken for another Nancy Davis. She described their meeting by saying, I dont know if it was exactly love at first sight, but it was pretty close. They were engaged at Chasens restaurant in Los Angeles and were married on March 4, 1952, at the Little Brown Church in the Valley San Fernando Valley. Actor William Holden served as best man at the ceremony. They had two children Patti and Ronald Ron Jr. . Observers described the Reagans relationship as close, authentic and intimate.Beschloss, p. 296 During his presidency they were reported to frequently display their affection for one another one press secretary said, They never took each other for granted. They never stopped courting. He often called her Mommy and she called him Ronnie. He once wrote to her, Whatever I treasure and enjoy... all would be without meaning if I didnt have you. When he was in the hospital in 1981 after an assassination attempt, she slept with one of his shirts to be comforted by his scent.Beschloss, p. 284 In a letter to the American people in 1994, Reagan wrote I have recently been told that I am one of the millions of Americans who will be afflicted with Alzheimers disease... I only wish there was some way I could spare Nancy from this painful experience, and in 1998, while he was stricken by Alzheimers, Nancy told Vanity Fair , Our relationship is very special. We were very much in love and still are. When I say my life began with Ronnie, well, its true. It did. I cant imagine life without him. Nancy Reagan died on March 6, 2016 at the age of 94. Early political career Ronald and Nancy Reagan aboard a boat in California, 1964 Reagan began as a Hollywood Democrat, and Franklin D. Roosevelt was a true hero to him. He moved to the right in the 1950s, became a Republican in 1962, and emerged as a leading conservative spokesman in the Goldwater campaign of 1964.Lori Clune, Political Ideology and Activism to 1966 in Andrew L. Johns, ed., A Companion to Ronald Reagan pp.22 39. In his early political career, he joined numerous political committees with a leftwing orientation, such as the American Veterans Committee. He fought against Republicansponsored righttowork legislation and supported Helen Gahagan Douglas in 1950 when she was defeated for the Senate by Richard Nixon. It was his realization that Communists were a powerful backstage influence in those groups that led him to rally his friends against them. Reagan spoke frequently at rallies with a strong ideological dimension in December 1945, he was stopped from leading an antinuclear rally in Hollywood by pressure from the Warner Bros. studio. He would later make nuclear weapons a key point of his presidency, specifically his opposition to mutual assured destruction, and he built on previous efforts to limit the spread of nuclear weapons. In the 1948 presidential election, Reagan strongly supported Harry S. Truman, appearing on stage with him during a campaign speech in Los Angeles.McCullough, David. Truman . Simon Schuster, 1992, p. 665. . However, in the early 1950s, as his relationship with actress Nancy Davis grew, he shifted to the right and endorsed the presidential candidacies of Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952 and 1956 as well as Richard Nixon in 1960.Pemberton pp.29 31 He was hired by General Electric in 1954 to host the General Electric Theater , a weekly TV drama series. He also traveled across the country to give talks to over 200,000 GE employees as a motivational speaker. His many speeches which he wrote himself were nonpartisan but carried a conservative, probusiness message he was influenced by Lemuel Boulware, a senior GE executive. Boulware, known for his tough stance against unions and his innovative strategies to win over workers, championed the core tenets of modern American conservatism free markets, anticommunism, lower taxes, and limited government.Thomas W. Evans, The Education of Ronald Reagan The General Electric Years and the Untold Story of His Conversion to Conservatism . Eager for a larger stage, but not allowed to enter politics by GE, he quit and formally registered as a Republican.Brands, Reagan p. 128 He often said, I didnt leave the Democratic Party. The party left me.Hayward, p. 635. When the legislation that would become Medicare was introduced in 1961, he created a recording for the American Medical Association warning that such legislation would mean the end of freedom in America. Reagan said that if his listeners did not write letters to prevent it, we will awake to find that we have socialism. And if you dont do this, and if I dont do it, one of these days, you and I are going to spend our sunset years telling our children, and our childrens children, what it once was like in America when men were free.Richard Rapaport, June 21, 2009, How AMA Coffeecup gave Reagan a boost. San Francisco Chronicle . He also joined the National Rifle Association and would become a lifetime member. Reagan gained national attention in his speeches for conservative presidential contender Barry Goldwater in 1964.Brands, Reagan pp.1 6 Speaking for Goldwater, Reagan stressed his belief in the importance of smaller government. He consolidated themes that he had developed in his talks for GE to deliver his famous speech, A Time for Choosing This A Time for Choosing speech was not enough to turn around the faltering Goldwater campaign, but it was the key event that established Reagans national political visibility.Ellen Reid Gold, Ronald Reagan and the oral tradition. Communication Studies 393 4 pp.159 175Kurt W. Ritter, Ronald Reagan and the speech The rhetoric of public relations politics. Western Journal of Communication 321 pp.50 58. Governor of California Ronald and Nancy Reagan celebrate his gubernatorial victory at the Biltmore Hotel, Los Angeles California Republicans were impressed with Reagans political views and charisma after his Time for Choosing speech, and in late 1965 he announced his campaign for Governor of California in the 1966 election.Gerard J. De Groot, A Goddamned Electable Person The 1966 California Gubernatorial Campaign of Ronald Reagan. History 82267 pp.429 448.Totton J. Anderson and Eugene C. Lee, The 1966 Election in California, Western Political Quarterly 202 pp.535 554 in JSTOR He defeated former San Francisco mayor George Christopher in the GOP primary. In Reagans campaign, he emphasized two main themes to send the welfare bums back to work, and, in reference to burgeoning antiwar and antiestablishment student protests at the University of California at Berkeley, to clean up the mess at Berkeley. In 1966, Reagan accomplished what both U.S. Senator William F. Knowland in 1958 and former Vice President Richard Nixon in 1962 had attempted to do he was elected, defeating twoterm governor Edmund G. Pat Brown, and was sworn in on January 2, 1967. In his first term, he froze government hiring and approved tax hikes to balance the budget.Cannon , p. 47. Shortly after the beginning of his term, Reagan tested the presidential waters in 1968 as part of a Stop Nixon movement, hoping to cut into Nixons southern support and become a compromise candidate if neither Nixon nor secondplace candidate Nelson Rockefeller received enough delegates to win on the first ballot at the Republican convention. However, by the time of the convention Nixon, had 692 delegate votes, 25 more than he needed to secure the nomination, followed by Rockefeller with Reagan in third place. Reagan was involved in several highprofile conflicts with the protest movements of the era, including his public criticism of university administrators for tolerating student demonstrations at the University of California, Berkeley campus. On May 15, 1969, during the Peoples Park protests at the universitys campus , Reagan sent the California Highway Patrol and other officers to quell the protests. This led to an incident that became known as Bloody Thursday, resulting in the death of student James Rector and the blinding of carpenter Alan Blanchard. In addition, 111 police officers were injured in the conflict, including one who was knifed in the chest. Reagan then called out 2,200 state National Guard troops to occupy the city of Berkeley for two weeks to crack down on the protesters.Cannon, Lou , p. 50. The Guard remained in Berkeley for 17 days, camping in Peoples Park, and demonstrations subsided as the university removed cordonedoff fencing and placed all development plans for Peoples Park on hold. One year after Bloody Thursday, Reagan responded to questions about campus protest movements saying, If it takes a bloodbath, lets get it over with. No more appeasement.Cannon, Lou , p. 295. When the Symbionese Liberation Army kidnapped Patty Hearst in Berkeley and demanded the distribution of food to the poor, Reagan joked to a group of political aides about a botulism outbreak contaminating the food.Reagans botulism joke is variously reported as sometimes you wonder whether there shouldnt be an outbreak of botulism and Its just too bad we cant have an epidemic of botulism The Reagans meet with President Richard Nixon and First Lady Pat Nixon, July 1970 Early in 1967, the national debate on abortion was starting to gain traction. In the early stages of the debate, Democratic California state senator Anthony C. Beilenson introduced the Therapeutic Abortion Act in an effort to reduce the number of backroom abortions performed in California. The state legislature sent the bill to Reagans desk where, after many days of indecision, he signed it on June 14, 1967.Cannon , p. 51 About two million abortions would be performed as a result, mostly because of a provision in the bill allowing abortions for the wellbeing of the mother. Reagan had been in office for only four months when he signed the bill, and later stated that had he been more experienced as governor, he would not have signed it. After he recognized what he called the consequences of the bill, he announced that he was prolife. He maintained that position later in his political career, writing extensively about abortion.Reagan, Ronald. Abortion and the conscience of the nation . Nashville T. Nelson. In 1967, Reagan signed the Mulford Act, which repealed a law allowing public carrying of loaded firearms . The bill, which was named after Republican assemblyman Don Mulford, garnered national attention after the Black Panthers marched bearing arms upon the California State Capitol to protest it. Despite an unsuccessful attempt to recall him in 1968,Recall Idea Got Its Start in L.A. in 1898, Los Angeles Times , July 13, 2003 Reagan was reelected governor in 1970, defeating Big Daddy Jesse M. Unruh. He chose not to seek a third term in the following election cycle. One of Reagans greatest frustrations in office concerned capital punishment, which he strongly supported. His efforts to enforce the states laws in this area were thwarted when the Supreme Court of California issued its People v. Anderson decision, which invalidated all death sentences issued in California before 1972, though the decision was later overturned by a constitutional amendment. The only execution during Reagans governorship was on April 12, 1967, when Aaron Mitchells sentence was carried out by the state in San Quentins gas chamber. When Reagan was governor in 1969, he signed the Family Law Act, which was an amalgam of two bills that had been written and revised by the California State Legislature over more than two years.Community Property and Family Law The Family Law Act of 1969 by Aidan R. Gough, Digitalcommons.law.ggu.edu It became the first nofault divorce legislation in the United States.1969 Cal. Stats. chapter 1608, p. 3313 Reagans terms as governor helped to shape the policies he would pursue in his later political career as president. By campaigning on a platform of sending the welfare bums back to work, he spoke out against the idea of the welfare state. He also strongly advocated the Republican ideal of less government regulation of the economy, including that of undue federal taxation. Reagan did not seek reelection to a third term as governor in 1974 and was succeeded by the Secretary of State, Democrat Jerry Brown, on January 6, 1975. 1976 presidential campaign On the podium with Gerald Ford after narrowly losing the nomination at the 1976 Republican National Convention In 1976, Reagan challenged incumbent President Gerald Ford in a bid to become the Republican Partys candidate for president. Reagan soon established himself as the conservative candidate with the support of likeminded organizations such as the American Conservative Union, which became key components of his political base, while Ford was considered a more moderate Republican. Ford considered himself as a moderate in domestic affairs, a conservative in fiscal affairs, and a dyedinthewool internationalist in foreign affairs. Reagans campaign relied on a strategy crafted by campaign manager John Sears of winning a few primaries early to damage the inevitability of Fords likely nomination. Reagan won North Carolina, Texas, and California, but the strategy failed, as he ended up losing New Hampshire, Florida, and his native Illinois. The Texas campaign lent renewed hope to Reagan, when he swept all 96 delegates chosen in the May 1 primary, with four more awaiting at the state convention. Much of the credit for that victory came from the work of three cochairmen, including Ernest Angelo, the mayor of Midland, and Ray Barnhart of Houston, whom Reagan as President would appoint in 1981 as director of the Federal Highway Administration. However, as the GOP convention neared, Ford appeared close to victory. Acknowledging his partys moderate wing, Reagan chose moderate Senator Richard Schweiker of Pennsylvania as his running mate if nominated. Nonetheless, Ford prevailed with 1,187 delegates to Reagans 1,070. Ford would go on to lose the 1976 presidential election to the Democratic nominee, Jimmy Carter. Reagans concession speech emphasized the dangers of nuclear war and the threat posed by the Soviet Union. Though he lost the nomination, he received 307 writein votes in New Hampshire, 388 votes as an Independent on Wyomings ballot, and a single electoral vote from a faithless elector in the November election from the state of Washington, which Ford had won over Democratic challenger Jimmy Carter. After the campaign, Reagan remained in the public debate with the Ronald Reagan Radio Commentary series and his political action committee, Citizens for the Republic, which was later revived in Alexandria, Virginia, in 2009 by the Reagan biographer Craig Shirley. 1980 presidential campaign 1980 electoral vote results The 1980 presidential election featured Reagan against incumbent President Jimmy Carter and was conducted amid a multitude of domestic concerns as well as the ongoing Iran hostage crisis. Reagans campaign stressed some of his fundamental principles lower taxes to stimulate the economy, less government interference in peoples lives, states rights,Kneeland, Douglas E. Reagan Campaigns at Mississippi Fair Nominee Tells Crowd of 10,000 He Is Backing States Rights. The New York Times . p. A11. Retrieved January 1, 2008. and a strong national defense.John David Lees, Michael Turner. Reagans first four years a new beginning Manchester University Press ND, 1988. p. 11 Reagan launched his campaign by declaring I believe in states rights. After receiving the Republican nomination, Reagan selected one of his primary opponents, George H. W. Bush, to be his running mate. His appearance in an October televised debate boosted his popularity. Reagan won the election, carrying 44 states with 489 electoral votes to 49 electoral votes for Carter . Reagan received 51 of the popular vote while Carter took 41, and Independent John B. Anderson received 7. Republicans captured the Senate for the first time since 1952, and gained 34 House seats, but the Democrats retained a majority. Presidency Inauguration parade . As Reagan read his inauguration address, 52 U.S. hostages were set free During his presidency, Reagan pursued policies that reflected his personal belief in individual freedom brought changes domestically, both to the U.S. economy and expanded military and contributed to the end of the Cold War. Termed the Reagan Revolution, his presidency would reinvigorate American morale,Cannon , p. 746 reinvigorate the U.S. economy and reduce reliance upon government. As president, Reagan kept a diary in which he commented on daily occurrences of his presidency and his views on the issues of the day. The diaries were published in May 2007 in the bestselling book, The Reagan Diaries . First term At the time, Reagan was the oldest person elected to the office of the presidency and the oldest president at the time of inauguration, at 69 years, 341 days . In his first inaugural address on January 20, 1981, which Reagan himself wrote, he addressed the countrys economic malaise, arguing In this present crisis, government is not the solution to our problems government is the problem. Prayer in schools and a moment of silence In 1981, Reagan became the first president to propose a constitutional amendment on school prayer. Reagans election reflected an oppositionDavid M. Ackerman, The Law of Church and State Developments in the Supreme Court Since 1980. Novinka Books, 2001. p. 2. to the 1962 Supreme Court case Engel v. Vitale , prohibiting state officials from composing an official state prayer and requiring that it be recited in the public schools. Reagans 1981 proposed amendment stated Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to prohibit individual or group prayer in public schools or other public institutions. No person shall be required by the United States or by any state to participate in prayer. In 1984, Reagan again raised the issue, asking Congress why cant freedom to acknowledge God be enjoyed again by children in every schoolroom across this landRonald Reagan, Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union. January 25, 1984 In 1985, Reagan expressed his disappointment that the Supreme Court ruling still bans a moment of silence for public schools, and said he had an uphill battle.George de Lama, Reagan Sees An Uphill Battle For Prayer In Public Schools. June 7, 1985, Chicago Tribune. In 1987 Reagan renewed his call for Congress to support voluntary prayer in schools and end the expulsion of God from Americas classrooms.Stuart Taylor Jr., High Court Accepts Appeal Of Moment Of Silence Law. January 28, 1987, The New York Times. Critics argue that any governmental imposition of prayer on public school students is involuntary. No Supreme Court rulings suggest that students cannot engage in silent prayer on their own. During his term in office, Reagan campaigned vigorously to restore organized prayer to the schools, first as a moment of prayer and later as a Moment of Silence.Lodi NewsSentinel, Reagan Urges School Moment of Silence. July 12, 1984. Reagan, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and Strom Thurmond at a state dinner in 1981 Assassination attempt On March 30, 1981 69 days into the new administration Reagan, his press secretary James Brady, Washington police officer Thomas Delahanty, and Secret Service agent Tim McCarthy were struck by gunfire from wouldbe assassin John Hinckley Jr. outside the Washington Hilton hotel. Although close to death upon arrival at George Washington University Hospital, Reagan was stabilized in the emergency room, then underwent emergency exploratory surgery. He recovered and was released from the hospital on April 11, becoming the first serving U.S. president to survive being shot in an assassination attempt. The attempt had great influence on Reagans popularity polls indicated his approval rating to be around 73. Reagan believed that God had spared his life so that he might go on to fulfill a greater purpose. Assistant Secretary of State nomination In response to conservative criticism that the State Department lacked hardliners, Reagan in 1981 nominated Ernest W. Lefever as Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. Lefever performed poorly at his confirmation hearings and the Senate committee rejected his nomination by vote of 4 13 Lefever withdrew his name. Air traffic controllers strike In 1981, PATCO, the union of federal air traffic controllers went on strike, violating a federal law prohibiting government unions from striking.Herbert R. Northrup, The Rise And Demise Of PATCO, Industrial and Labor Relations Review , January 1984, Vol. 37 Issue 2, pp.167 184 Declaring the situation an emergency as described in the 1947 Taft Hartley Act, Reagan stated that if the air traffic controllers do not report for work within 48 hours, they have forfeited their jobs and will be terminated. They did not return and on August 5, Reagan fired 11,345 striking air traffic controllers who had ignored his order, and used supervisors and military controllers to handle the nations commercial air traffic until new controllers could be hired and trained. A leading reference work on public administration concluded, The firing of PATCO employees not only demonstrated a clear resolve by the president to take control of the bureaucracy, but it also sent a clear message to the private sector that unions no longer needed to be feared.David Schultz, Encyclopedia of public administration and public policy p. 359 Reaganomics and the economy Outlining his plan for Tax Reduction Legislation from the Oval Office in a televised address, July 1981 During Jimmy Carters last year in office , inflation averaged 12.5, compared with 4.4 during Reagans last year in office .Cannon , p. 235. During Reagans administration, the unemployment rate declined from 7.5 to 5.4, with the rate reaching highs of 10.8 in 1982 and 10.4 in 1983, averaging 7.5 over the eight years, and real GDP growth averaged 3.4 with a high of 8.6 in 1983, while nominal GDP growth averaged 7.4, and peaked at 12.2 in 1982. Reagan implemented policies based on supplyside economics, advocating a laissezfaire philosophy and freemarket fiscal policy, seeking to stimulate the economy with large, acrosstheboard tax cuts.Cannon p. 99Hayward, pp.146 148 He also supported returning the United States to some sort of gold standard, and successfully urged Congress to establish the U.S. Gold Commission to study how one could be implemented. Citing the economic theories of Arthur Laffer, Reagan promoted the proposed tax cuts as potentially stimulating the economy enough to expand the tax base, offsetting the revenue loss due to reduced rates of taxation, a theory that entered political discussion as the Laffer curve. Reaganomics was the subject of debate with supporters pointing to improvements in certain key economic indicators as evidence of success, and critics pointing to large increases in federal budget deficits and the national debt. His policy of peace through strength resulted in a record peacetime defense buildup including a 40 real increase in defense spending between 1981 and 1985. During Reagans presidency, federal income tax rates were lowered significantly with the signing of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which lowered the top marginal tax bracket from 70 to 50 and the lowest bracket from 14 to 11. Other tax increases passed by Congress and signed by Reagan ensured however that tax revenues over his two terms were 18.2 of GDP as compared to 18.1 over the 40year period of 1970 2010. Then, in 1982 the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982 was signed into law, initiating one of the United States first public private partnerships and a major part of the presidents job creation program. Reagans Assistant Secretary of Labor and Chief of Staff, Al Angrisani, was a primary architect of the bill. President Reagan with real estate developer and future president Donald Trump in 1987 Conversely, Congress passed and Reagan signed into law tax increases of some nature in every year from 1981 to 1987 to continue funding such government programs as Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 , Social Security, and the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 . Despite the fact that TEFRA was the largest peacetime tax increase in American history,Even Reagan Raised Taxes, Forbes. Retrieved August 14, 2010. gross domestic product growth recovered strongly after the early 1980s recession ended in 1982, and grew during his eight years in office at an annual rate of 7.9 per year, with a high of 12.2 growth in 1981. Unemployment peaked at 10.8 monthly rate in December 1982 higher than any time since the Great Depression then dropped during the rest of Reagans presidency.Hayward, p. 185 Sixteen million new jobs were created, while inflation significantly decreased. The Tax Reform Act of 1986, another bipartisan effort championed by Reagan, simplified the tax code by reducing the number of tax brackets to four and slashing a number of tax breaks. The top rate was dropped to 28, but capital gains taxes were increased on those with the highest incomes from 20 to 28. The increase of the lowest tax bracket from 11 to 15 was more than offset by expansion of the personal exemption, standard deduction, and earned income tax credit. The net result was the removal of six million poor Americans from the income tax roll and a reduction of income tax liability at all income levels. The net effect of all Reaganera tax bills was a 1 decrease in government revenues when compared to Treasury Department revenue estimates from the Administrations first postenactment January budgets.Tempalski , Table 2 However, federal income tax receipts increased from 1980 to 1989, rising from 308.7 billion to 549 billion or an average annual rate of 8.2 , and federal outlays grew at an annual rate of 7.1. Addressing Congress on the Program for Economic Recovery , April 28, 1981 Reagans policies proposed that economic growth would occur when marginal tax rates were low enough to spur investment, which would then lead to higher employment and wages. Critics labeled this trickledown economics the belief that tax policies that benefit the wealthy will create a trickledown effect to the poor. Questions arose whether Reagans policies benefited the wealthy more than those living in poverty, and many poor and minority citizens viewed Reagan as indifferent to their struggles. These views were exacerbated by the fact that Reagans economic regimen included freezing the minimum wage at 3.35 an hour, slashing federal assistance to local governments by 60, cutting the budget for public housing and Section 8 rent subsidies in half, and eliminating the antipoverty Community Development Block Grant program. The widening gap between the rich and poor had already begun during the 1970s before Reagans economic policies took effect. Along with Reagans 1981 cut in the top regular tax rate on unearned income, he reduced the maximum capital gains rate to 20. Reagan later set tax rates on capital gains at the same level as the rates on ordinary income like salaries and wages, with both topping out at 28. Reagan is viewed as an antitax hero despite raising taxes eleven times over the course of his presidency, all in the name of fiscal responsibility. According to Paul Krugman, Over all, the 1982 tax increase undid about a third of the 1981 cut as a share of GDP, the increase was substantially larger than Mr.Clintons 1993 tax increase. According to historian and domestic policy adviser Bruce Bartlett, Reagans tax increases over the course of his presidency took back half of the 1981 tax cut. Further following his opposition to government intervention, Reagan cut the budgets of nonmilitary programs including Medicaid, food stamps, federal education programs and the EPA. While he protected entitlement programs, such as Social Security and Medicare, his administration attempted to purge many people with disabilities from the Social Security disability rolls. The administrations stance toward the savings and loan industry contributed to the savings and loan crisis. It is also suggested, by a minority of Reaganomics critics, that the policies partially influenced the stock market crash of 1987, but there is no consensus regarding a single source for the crash. In order to cover newly spawned federal budget deficits, the United States borrowed heavily both domestically and abroad, raising the national debt from 997billion to 2.85trillion. Reagan described the new debt as the greatest disappointment of his presidency.Cannon , p. 128 He reappointed Paul Volcker as Chairman of the Federal Reserve, and in 1987 he appointed monetarist Alan Greenspan to succeed him. Reagan ended the price controls on domestic oil which had contributed to energy crises in the early 1970s. The price of oil subsequently dropped, and the 1980s did not see the fuel shortages that the 1970s had. Reagan also fulfilled a 1980 campaign promise to repeal the windfall profits tax in 1988, which had previously increased dependence on foreign oil. Some economists, such as Nobel Prize winners Milton Friedman and Robert Mundell, argue that Reagans tax policies invigorated Americas economy and contributed to the economic boom of the 1990s. Other economists, such as Nobel Prize winner Robert Solow, argue that Reagans deficits were a major reason his successor, George H. W. Bush, reneged on a campaign promise and resorted to raising taxes. During Reagans presidency, a program was initiated within the United States Intelligence Community to ensure Americas economic strength. The program, Project Socrates, developed and demonstrated the means required for the United States to generate and lead the next evolutionary leap in technology acquisition and utilization for a competitive advantage automated innovation. To ensure that the United States acquired the maximum benefit from automated innovation, Reagan, during his second term, had an executive order drafted to create a new federal agency to implement the Project Socrates results on a nationwide basis. However, Reagans term came to end before the executive order could be coordinated and signed, and the incoming Bush administration, labeling Project Socrates as industrial policy, had it terminated. Escalation of the Cold War As the first U.S. president invited to speak before the British Parliament , Reagan predicted Marxism would end up on the ash heap of history Reagan escalated the Cold War, accelerating a reversal from the policy of dtente which began in 1979 after the Soviet war in Afghanistan. Reagan ordered a massive buildup of the United States Armed Forces and implemented new policies towards the Soviet Union reviving the B1 Lancer program that had been canceled by the Carter administration, and producing the MX missile. In response to Soviet deployment of the SS20, Reagan oversaw NATOs deployment of the Pershing missile in West Germany. In 1984, journalist Nicholas Lemann interviewed Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger and summarized the strategy of the Reagan administration to roll back the Soviet Union Lemann notes that when he wrote that in 1984, he thought the Reaganites were living in a fantasy world. But by 2016, Lemann stated that the passage represents a fairly uncontroversial description of what Reagan actually did. Meeting with leaders of the Afghan Mujahideen in the Oval Office, 1983 Together with the United Kingdoms prime minister Margaret Thatcher, Reagan denounced the Soviet Union in ideological terms. In a famous address on June 8, 1982, to the Parliament of the United Kingdom in the Royal Gallery of the Palace of Westminster, Reagan said, the forward march of freedom and democracy will leave Marxism Leninism on the ash heap of history.Robert C. Rowland, and John M. Jones. Reagan at Westminster Foreshadowing the End of the Cold War Addresses to both Houses of Parliament since 1939, Parliamentary Information List, Standard Note SNPC4092, Last updated November 12, 2014, Author Department of Information Services On March 3, 1983, he predicted that communism would collapse, stating, Communism is another sad, bizarre chapter in human history whose last pages even now are being written. In a speech to the National Association of Evangelicals on March 8, 1983, Reagan called the Soviet Union an evil empire.Cannon , pp.314 317. After Soviet fighters downed Korean Air Lines Flight 007 near Moneron Island on September 1, 1983, carrying 269 people, including Georgia congressman Larry McDonald, Reagan labeled the act a massacre and declared that the Soviets had turned against the world and the moral precepts which guide human relations among people everywhere. The Reagan administration responded to the incident by suspending all Soviet passenger air service to the United States, and dropped several agreements being negotiated with the Soviets, wounding them financially. As a result of the shootdown, and the cause of KAL 007s going astray thought to be inadequacies related to its navigational system, Reagan announced on September 16, 1983, that the Global Positioning System would be made available for civilian use, free of charge, once completed in order to avert similar navigational errors in future.Pellerin, United States Updates Global Positioning System Technology New GPS satellite ushers in a range of future improvements Reagan with King Fahd of Saudi Arabia in 1985. The U.S. and Saudi Arabia supplied money and arms to the antiSoviet fighters in Afghanistan. Under a policy that came to be known as the Reagan Doctrine, Reagan and his administration also provided overt and covert aid to anticommunist resistance movements in an effort to rollback Sovietbacked communist governments in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Reagan deployed the CIAs Special Activities Division to Afghanistan and Pakistan. They were instrumental in training, equipping and leading Mujahideen forces against the Soviet Army. President Reagans Covert Action program has been given credit for assisting in ending the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, though some of the United States funded armaments introduced then would later pose a threat to U.S. troops in the 2001 War in Afghanistan. However, in a break from the Carter policy of arming Taiwan under the Taiwan Relations Act, Reagan also agreed with the communist government in China to reduce the sale of arms to Taiwan.Harrison, Selig S. A Chinese Civil War. The National Interest , February 7, 2011. In March 1983, Reagan introduced the Strategic Defense Initiative, a defense project that would have used ground and spacebased systems to protect the United States from attack by strategic nuclear ballistic missiles. Reagan believed that this defense shield could make nuclear war impossible.Beschloss, p. 293 There was much disbelief surrounding the programs scientific feasibility, leading opponents to dub SDI Star Wars and argue that its technological objective was unattainable. The Soviets became concerned about the possible effects SDI would have leader Yuri Andropov said it would put the entire world in jeopardy.Beschloss, p. 294 For those reasons, David Gergen, former aide to President Reagan, believes that in retrospect, SDI hastened the end of the Cold War. Critics labeled Reagans foreign policies as aggressive, imperialistic, and chided them as warmongering, though they were supported by leading American conservatives who argued that they were necessary to protect U.S. security interests. The Reagan administration also backed anticommunist leaders accused of severe human rights violations, such as Efran Ros Montt of Guatemala and Hissne Habr of Chad,Richard Allen Greene, Critics question Reagan legacy, BBC News , June 9, 2004What Guilt Does the U.S. Bear in Guatemala The New York Times , May 19, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2014.From U.S. Ally to Convicted War Criminal Inside Chads Hissne Habrs Close Ties to Reagan Admin. Democracy Now May 31, 2016. and helped Iranian leader Ruhollah Khomeini identify and purge communists in his government. Available online here. Lebanese Civil War Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan pay their respects to the 17 American victims of the April 18 attack on the U.S. embassy by Hezbollah in Beirut, 1983 With the approval of Congress, Reagan sent forces to Lebanon in 1983 to reduce the threat of the Lebanese Civil War. The American peacekeeping forces in Beirut, a part of a multinational force during the Lebanese Civil War, were attacked on October 23, 1983. The Beirut barracks bombing killed 241 American servicemen and wounded more than 60 others by a suicide truck bomber. Reagan sent in the battleship to shell Syrian positions in Lebanon. He then withdrew all the Marines from Lebanon. Operation Urgent Fury On October 25, 1983, Reagan ordered U.S. forces to invade Grenada where a 1979 coup dtat had established an independent nonaligned Marxist Leninist government. A formal appeal from the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States led to the intervention of U.S. forces President Reagan also cited an allegedly regional threat posed by a SovietCuban military buildup in the Caribbean and concern for the safety of several hundred American medical students at St.Georges University as adequate reasons to invade. Operation Urgent Fury was the first major military operation conducted by U.S. forces since the Vietnam War, several days of fighting commenced, resulting in a U.S. victory, with 19 American fatalities and 116 wounded American soldiers. In midDecember, after a new government was appointed by the governorgeneral, U.S. forces withdrew. 1984 presidential campaign 1984 presidential electoral votes by state. Reagan won every state except Mondales home state of Minnesota Mondale also carried the District of Columbia Reagan accepted the Republican nomination in Dallas, Texas. He proclaimed that it was morning again in America, regarding the recovering economy and the dominating performance by the U.S. athletes at the 1984 Summer Olympics, among other things. He became the first president to open an Olympic Games held in the United States. Reagans opponent in the 1984 presidential election was former Vice President Walter Mondale. With questions about Reagans age, and a weak performance in the first presidential debate, his ability to perform the duties of president for another term was questioned. His apparent confused and forgetful behavior was evident to his supporters they had previously known him clever and witty. Rumors began to circulate that he had Alzheimers disease. Reagan rebounded in the second debate, and confronted questions about his age, quipping, I will not make age an issue of this campaign. I am not going to exploit, for political purposes, my opponents youth and inexperience, which generated applause and laughter, even from Mondale himself. That November, Reagan was reelected, winning 49 of 50 states. The presidents overwhelming victory saw Mondale carry only his home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia. Reagan won a record 525 electoral votes, the most of any candidate in United States history, and received 59 of the popular vote to Mondales 41. Second term Reagan is sworn in for a second term as president by Chief Justice Burger in the Capitol rotunda Reagan was sworn in as president for the second time on January 20, 1985, in a private ceremony at the White House. At 73 years of age, he was the oldest person to ever have been sworn into a second term. Because January 20 fell on a Sunday, a public celebration was not held but took place in the Capitol rotunda the following day. January 21 was one of the coldest days on record in Washington, D.C. due to poor weather, inaugural celebrations were held inside the Capitol. In the coming weeks he shook up his staff somewhat, moving White House Chief of Staff James Baker to Secretary of the Treasury and naming Treasury Secretary Donald Regan, a former Merrill Lynch officer, Chief of Staff. In 1985, Reagan visited a German military cemetery in Bitburg to lay a wreath with West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl. It was determined that the cemetery held the graves of fortynine members of the WaffenSS. Reagan issued a statement that called the Nazi soldiers buried in that cemetery as themselves victims, a designation which ignited a stir over whether Reagan had equated the SS men to victims of the Holocaust Pat Buchanan, Reagans Director of Communications, argued that the president did not equate the SS members with the actual Holocaust, but as victims of the ideology of Nazism. Now strongly urged to cancel the visit,Reeves, p. 249 the president responded that it would be wrong to back down on a promise he had made to Chancellor Kohl. He ultimately attended the ceremony where two military generals laid a wreath.Reeves, p. 255 Reagan addresses the nation after the Challenger disaster The disintegration of the Space Shuttle Challenger on January 28, 1986, proved a pivotal moment in Reagans presidency. All seven astronauts aboard were killed. On the night of the disaster, Reagan delivered a speech, written by Peggy Noonan, in which he said In 1988, near the end of the Iran Iraq War, the U.S. Navy guided missile cruiser accidentally shot down Iran Air Flight 655 killing 290 civilian passengers. The incident further worsened already tense Iran United States relations. War on Drugs Reagan announced a War on Drugs in 1982, in response to concerns about the increasing crack epidemic. Though Nixon had previously declared a war on drugs, Reagan advocated more militant policies. He said that drugs were menacing our society and promised to fight for drugfree schools and workplaces, expanded drug treatment, stronger law enforcement and drug interdiction efforts, and greater public awareness. In 1986, Reagan signed a drug enforcement bill that budgeted 1.7billion to fund the War on Drugs and specified a mandatory minimum penalty for drug offenses. The bill was criticized for promoting significant racial disparities in the prison population and critics also charged that the policies did little to reduce the availability of drugs on the street, while resulting in a great financial burden for America. Defenders of the effort point to success in reducing rates of adolescent drug use marijuana use among highschool seniors declined from 33 in 1980 to 12 in 1991. First Lady Nancy Reagan made the War on Drugs her main priority by founding the Just Say No drug awareness campaign, which aimed to discourage children and teenagers from engaging in recreational drug use by offering various ways of saying no. Nancy Reagan traveled to 65 cities in 33 states, raising awareness about the dangers of drugs including alcohol. Response to AIDS epidemic The Reagan administration largely ignored the AIDS crisis, which began to unfold in the United States in 1981, the same year Reagan took office. AIDS research was chronically underfunded during Reagans administration, and requests for more funding by doctors at the Centers for Disease Control were routinely denied. By the end of the first 12 months of the epidemic, when more than 1,000 people had died of AIDS in the U.S., the CDC had spent less than 1 million on AIDS research. In contrast, funding had been made amply available to the CDC in their efforts to stop Legionnaires disease after an outbreak in 1976 the CDC had spent 9 million in fighting Legionnaires disease, though the outbreak had caused fewer than 50 deaths. By the time President Reagan had given his first speech on the epidemic, some six years into his presidency, 36,058 Americans had been diagnosed with AIDS and 20,849 had died of it. By the end of 1989, the year Reagan left office, 115,786 people had been diagnosed with AIDS in the United States, and more than 70,000 of them had died of it. It has been suggested that far fewer would have died, both then and in the decades that followed, if the Reagan administration had applied the same determination in combatting AIDS as the Ford administration had applied to fighting Legionnaires disease. Libya bombing British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher granted the U.S. use of British airbases to launch the Libya attack Relations between Libya and the United States under President Reagan were continually contentious, beginning with the Gulf of Sidra incident in 1981 by 1982, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi was considered by the CIA to be, along with USSR leader Leonid Brezhnev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro, part of a group known as the unholy trinity and was also labeled as our international public enemy number one by a CIA official. These tensions were later revived in early April 1986, when a bomb exploded in a Berlin discothque, resulting in the injury of 63 American military personnel and death of one serviceman. Stating that there was irrefutable proof that Libya had directed the terrorist bombing, Reagan authorized the use of force against the country. In the late evening of April 15, 1986, the United States launched a series of airstrikes on ground targets in Libya. Britains prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, allowed the U.S. Air Force to use Britains air bases to launch the attack, on the justification that the UK was supporting Americas right to selfdefense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. The attack was designed to halt Gaddafis ability to export terrorism, offering him incentives and reasons to alter his criminal behavior. The president addressed the nation from the Oval Office after the attacks had commenced, stating, When our citizens are attacked or abused anywhere in the world on the direct orders of hostile regimes, we will respond so long as Im in this office. The attack was condemned by many countries. By a vote of 79 in favor to 28 against with 33 abstentions, the United Nations General Assembly adopted resolution 4138 which condemns the military attack perpetrated against the Socialist Peoples Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on April 15, 1986, which constitutes a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law. Immigration Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act in 1986. The act made it illegal to knowingly hire or recruit illegal immigrants, required employers to attest to their employees immigration status, and granted amnesty to approximately three million illegal immigrants who entered the United States before January 1, 1982, and had lived in the country continuously. Critics argue that the employer sanctions were without teeth and failed to stem illegal immigration. Upon signing the act at a ceremony held beside the newly refurbished Statue of Liberty, Reagan said, The legalization provisions in this act will go far to improve the lives of a class of individuals who now must hide in the shadows, without access to many of the benefits of a free and open society. Very soon many of these men and women will be able to step into the sunlight and, ultimately, if they choose, they may become Americans.Reagan, Ronald. Statement on Signing the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Collected Speeches, Ronald Reagan Presidential Library. Retrieved August 15, 2007. Reagan also said, The employer sanctions program is the keystone and major element. It will remove the incentive for illegal immigration by eliminating the job opportunities which draw illegal aliens here. Iran Contra affair Reagan receives the Tower Commission Report regarding the IranContra affair in the Cabinet Room with John Tower and Edmund Muskie In 1986, the Iran Contra affair became a problem for the administration stemming from the use of proceeds from covert arms sales to Iran during the Iran Iraq War to fund the Contra rebels fighting against the government in Nicaragua, which had been specifically outlawed by an act of Congress. The affair became a political scandal in the United States during the 1980s. The International Court of Justice, whose jurisdiction to decide the case was disputed by the United States, ruled that the United States had violated international law and breached treaties in Nicaragua in various ways. President Reagan professed that he was unaware of the plots existence. He opened his own investigation and appointed two Republicans and one Democrat to investigate the scandal. The commission could not find direct evidence that Reagan had prior knowledge of the program, but criticized him heavily for his disengagement from managing his staff, making the diversion of funds possible. A separate report by Congress concluded that If the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing, he should have. Reagans popularity declined from 67 to 46 in less than a week, the greatest and quickest decline ever for a president. The scandal resulted in fourteen indictments within Reagans staff, and eleven convictions. Many Central Americans criticize Reagan for his support of the Contras, calling him an anticommunist zealot, blinded to human rights abuses, while others say he saved Central America. Daniel Ortega, Sandinistan and president of Nicaragua, said that he hoped God would forgive Reagan for his dirty war against Nicaragua. End of the Cold War Gorbachev and Reagan sign the INF Treaty at the White House, 1987 Until the early 1980s, the United States had relied on the qualitative superiority of its weapons to essentially frighten the Soviets, but the gap had been narrowed. Although the Soviet Union did not accelerate military spending after President Reagans military buildup, their large military expenses, in combination with collectivized agriculture and inefficient planned manufacturing, were a heavy burden for the Soviet economy. At the same time, Saudi Arabia increased oil production, which resulted in a drop of oil prices in 1985 to onethird of the previous level oil was the main source of Soviet export revenues. These factors contributed to a stagnant Soviet economy during Gorbachevs tenure. Reagan recognized the change in the direction of the Soviet leadership with Mikhail Gorbachev, and shifted to diplomacy, with a view to encourage the Soviet leader to pursue substantial arms agreements. Reagans personal mission was to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons, which he regarded as totally irrational, totally inhumane, good for nothing but killing, possibly destructive of life on earth and civilization. He was able to start discussions on nuclear disarmament with General Secretary Gorbachev. Gorbachev and Reagan held four summit conferences between 1985 and 1988 the first in Geneva, Switzerland, the second in Reykjavk, Iceland, the third in Washington, D.C., and the fourth in Moscow. Reagan believed that if he could persuade the Soviets to allow for more democracy and free speech, this would lead to reform and the end of Communism. Challenging Gorbachev to tear down this wall at the Brandenburg Gate Speaking at the Berlin Wall on June 12, 1987, Reagan challenged Gorbachev to go further, saying General Secretary Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, if you seek liberalization, come here to this gate Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall Before Gorbachevs visit to Washington, D.C., for the third summit in 1987, the Soviet leader announced his intention to pursue significant arms agreements. The timing of the announcement led Western diplomats to contend that Gorbachev was offering major concessions to the United States on the levels of conventional forces, nuclear weapons, and policy in Eastern Europe. He and Reagan signed the IntermediateRange Nuclear Forces Treaty at the White House, which eliminated an entire class of nuclear weapons. The two leaders laid the framework for the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, or START I Reagan insisted that the name of the treaty be changed from Strategic Arms Limitation Talks to Strategic Arms Reduction Talks. When Reagan visited Moscow for the fourth summit in 1988, he was viewed as a celebrity by the Soviets. A journalist asked the president if he still considered the Soviet Union the evil empire. No, he replied, I was talking about another time, another era. At Gorbachevs request, Reagan gave a speech on free markets at the Moscow State University.Reagan , p. 713 In his autobiography, An American Life , Reagan expressed his optimism about the new direction that they charted and his warm feelings for Gorbachev.Reagan , p. 720 In November 1989, ten months after Reagan left office, the Berlin Wall was opened, the Cold War was unofficially declared over at the Malta Summit on December 3, 1989, and two years later, the Soviet Union collapsed. Health Early in his presidency, Reagan started wearing a custommade, technologically advanced hearing aid, first in his right ear and later in his left ear as well. His decision to go public in 1983 regarding his wearing the small, audioamplifying device boosted their sales. On July 13, 1985, Reagan underwent surgery at Bethesda Naval Hospital to remove cancerous polyps from his colon. He relinquished presidential power to the Vice President for eight hours in a similar procedure as outlined in the 25th Amendment, which he specifically avoided invoking. The surgery lasted just under three hours and was successful.Bumgarner, p. 285 Reagan resumed the powers of the presidency later that day.Bumgarner, p. 204 In August of that year, he underwent an operation to remove skin cancer cells from his nose. In October, more skin cancer cells were detected on his nose and removed. In January 1987, Reagan underwent surgery for an enlarged prostate which caused further worries about his health. No cancerous growths were found, however, and he was not sedated during the operation. In July of that year, aged 76, he underwent a third skin cancer operation on his nose. On January 7, 1989, Reagan underwent surgery at Walter Reed Army Medical Center to repair a Dupuytrens contracture of the ring finger of his left hand. The surgery lasted for more than three hours and was performed under regional anesthesia. This procedure was done just thirteen days before he left office. For this reason he had a hand and finger bandage the day of his farewell speech and the day of the inauguration of George H. W. Bush. Judiciary During his 1980 campaign, Reagan pledged that, if given the opportunity, he would appoint the first female Supreme Court Justice.Reagan , p. 280 That opportunity came in his first year in office when he nominated Sandra Day OConnor to fill the vacancy created by the retirement of Justice Potter Stewart. In his second term, Reagan elevated William Rehnquist to succeed Warren E. Burger as Chief Justice, and named Antonin Scalia to fill the vacant seat. Reagan nominated conservative jurist Robert Bork to the high court in 1987. Senator Ted Kennedy, a Democrat of Massachusetts, strongly condemned Bork, and great controversy ensued. Borks nomination was rejected 58 42. Reagan then nominated Douglas Ginsburg, but Ginsburg withdrew his name from consideration after coming under fire for his cannabis use.Media Frenzies in Our Time, Special to The Washington Post Anthony Kennedy was eventually confirmed in his place. Along with his three Supreme Court appointments, Reagan appointed 83 judges to the United States courts of appeals, and 290 judges to the United States district courts. Reagan also nominated Vaughn Walker, who would later be revealed to be the earliest known gay federal judge, to the United States District Court for the Central District of California. However, the nomination stalled in the Senate, and Walker was not confirmed until he was renominated by Reagans successor, George H.W. Bush.Biographical Directory of Federal Judges Walker, Vaughn R. History of the Federal Judiciary . Federal Judicial Center. Retrieved March 19, 2013. Early in his tenure, Reagan appointed Clarence M. Pendleton Jr., of San Diego as the first African American to chair the United States Commission on Civil Rights. Pendleton tried to steer the commission into a conservative direction in line with Reagans views on social and civil rights policy during his tenure from 1981 until his sudden death in 1988. Pendleton soon aroused the ire of many civil rights advocates and feminists when he ridiculed the comparable worth proposal as being Looney Tunes. In 1984, Reagan commuted the 18year sentence of former Louisiana Commissioner of Agriculture and Forestry Gil Dozier, a Democrat from Baton Rouge, to the time served for violations of both the Hobbs and the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations acts. On September 23, 1980, the United States District Court for the Middle District of Louisiana convicted Dozier of extortion and racketeering when he pushed companies doing business with his department to make campaign contributions on his behalf. Reagan determined that the 18year sentence was excessive compared to what other political figures in similar circumstances had been receiving.Persistence paid off for jailed Dozier, Minden PressHerald , July 23, 1984, p. 1 Postpresidency Public speaking In Los Angeles after leaving the White House, early 1990s After leaving office in 1989, the Reagans purchased a home in Bel Air, Los Angeles, in addition to the Reagan Ranch in Santa Barbara. They regularly attended Bel Air Church and occasionally made appearances on behalf of the Republican Party Reagan delivered a wellreceived speech at the 1992 Republican National Convention. Previously on November 4, 1991, the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library was dedicated and opened to the public. At the dedication ceremonies, five presidents were in attendance, as well as six first ladies, marking the first time that five presidents were gathered in the same location. Reagan continued publicly to speak in favor of a lineitem veto the Brady Bill a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget and the repeal of the 22nd Amendment, which prohibits anyone from serving more than two terms as president.Reagan , p. 726 In 1992 Reagan established the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award with the newly formed Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation. His final public speech was on February 3, 1994, during a tribute to him in Washington, D.C., and his last major public appearance was at the funeral of Richard Nixon on April 27, 1994. Assault On April 13, 1992, Reagan was assaulted by an antinuclear protester during a luncheon speech while accepting an award from the National Association of Broadcasters in Las Vegas. The protester, 41year old Richard Paul Springer, smashed a 2foothigh 30pound crystal statue of an eagle that the broadcasters had given the former president. Flying shards of glass hit Reagan, but he was not injured. Using media credentials, Springer intended to announce government plans for an underground nuclear weapons test in the Nevada desert the following day. Springer was the founder of an antinuclear group called the 100th Monkey . Following his arrest on assault charges, a Secret Service spokesman could not explain how Springer got past the federal agents who guarded Reagans life at all times. Later, Springer pled guilty to reduced charges and said he hadnt meant to hurt Reagan through his actions. He pled guilty to a misdemeanor federal charge of interfering with the Secret Service, but other felony charges of assault and resisting officers were dropped. Alzheimers disease Announcement and reaction 1994 In August 1994, at the age of 83, Reagan was diagnosed with Alzheimers disease, an incurable neurological disorder which destroys brain cells and ultimately causes death. In November, he informed the nation through a handwritten letter, writing in part After his diagnosis, letters of support from wellwishers poured into his California home. The Reagans with a model of , May 1996. At left is Newport News Shipbuilding Chairman and CEO Bill Fricks But there was also speculation over how long Reagan had demonstrated symptoms of mental degeneration. Not long after the attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan, at a reception for mayors, Reagan greeted his Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Samuel Pierce in 1981 by saying How are you, Mr Mayor How are things in your city Former CBS White House correspondent Lesley Stahl recounted that, in her final meeting with the president in 1986, Reagan did not seem to know who Stahl was, and that she came close to reporting that Reagan was senile, but at the end of the meeting, Reagan had regained his alertness. However, Dr. Lawrence K. Altman, a physician employed as a reporter for The New York Times , noted that the line between mere forgetfulness and the beginning of Alzheimers can be fuzzy, and all four of Reagans White House doctors said that they saw no evidence of Alzheimers while he was president. Dr. John E. Hutton, Reagans primary physician from 1984 to 1989, said the president absolutely did not show any signs of dementia or Alzheimers. His former Chief of Staff James Baker considered ludicrous the idea that Reagan slept during cabinet meetings. Other staff members, former aides, and friends said they saw no indication of Alzheimers while he was president. Reagan did experience occasional memory lapses, though, especially with names. Reagans doctors say that he only began exhibiting overt symptoms of the illness in late 1992 or 1993, several years after he had left office. For example, Reagan repeated a toast to Margaret Thatcher, with identical words and gestures, at his 82ndbirthday party on February 6, 1993. Complicating the picture, Reagan suffered an episode of head trauma in July 1989, five years before his diagnosis. After being thrown from a horse in Mexico, a subdural hematoma was found and surgically treated later in the year.Reagan, Nancy , pp.179 180 Nancy Reagan, citing what doctors told her, asserted that her husbands 1989 fall hastened the onset of Alzheimers disease, although acute brain injury has not been conclusively proven to accelerate Alzheimers or dementia. Reagans onetime physician Daniel Ruge has said it is possible, but not certain, that the horse accident affected the course of Reagans memory. Progression 1994 2004 As the years went on, the disease slowly destroyed Reagans mental capacity. He was only able to recognize a few people, including his wife, Nancy. He remained active, however he took walks through parks near his home and on beaches, played golf regularly, and until 1999 he often went to his office in nearby Century City. Reagan suffered a fall at his Bel Air home on January 13, 2001, resulting in a broken hip. The fracture was repaired the following day and the 89yearold Reagan returned home later that week, although he faced difficult physical therapy at home. On February 6, 2001, Reagan reached the age of 90, becoming the third former president to do so . Reagans public appearances became much less frequent with the progression of the disease, and as a result, his family decided that he would live in quiet semiisolation with his wife Nancy. Nancy Reagan told CNNs Larry King in 2001 that very few visitors were allowed to see her husband because she felt that Ronnie would want people to remember him as he was. After her husbands diagnosis and death, Nancy Reagan became a stemcell research advocate, urging Congress and President George W. Bush to support federal funding for embryonic stemcell research, something Bush opposed. In 2009, she praised President Barack Obama for lifting restrictions on such research. Nancy Reagan said that she believed it could lead to a cure for Alzheimers. Death and funeral Reagans casket lying in state in the Capitol rotunda Reagan died of pneumonia, complicated by Alzheimers fdisease, at his home in the Bel Air district of Los Angeles, California, on the afternoon of June 5, 2004. A short time after his death, Nancy Reagan released a statement saying, My family and I would like the world to know that President Ronald Reagan has died after 10 years of Alzheimers disease at 93 years of age. We appreciate everyones prayers. President George W. Bush declared June 11 a National Day of Mourning, and international tributes came in from around the world. Reagans body was taken to the Kingsley and Gates Funeral Home in Santa Monica, California later in the day, where wellwishers paid tribute by laying flowers and American flags in the grass. On June 7, his body was removed and taken to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, where a brief family funeral was held conducted by Pastor Michael Wenning. His body lay in repose in the Library lobby until June 9 over 100,000 people viewed the coffin. On June 9, Reagans body was flown to Washington, D.C. where he became the tenth U.S. president to lie in state in thirtyfour hours, 104,684 people filed past the coffin. On June 11, a state funeral was conducted in the Washington National Cathedral, and presided over by President George W. Bush. Eulogies were given by former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, and both former President George H. W. Bush and President George W. Bush. Also in attendance were Mikhail Gorbachev, and many world leaders, including British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Prince Charles, representing his mother Queen Elizabeth II, German Chancellor Gerhard Schrder, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, and interim presidents Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan, and Ghazi alYawer of Iraq. After the funeral, the Reagan entourage was flown back to the Ronald W. Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, California, where another service was held, and President Reagan was interred. At the time of his death, Reagan was the longestlived president in U.S. history, having lived 93 years and 120 days . He is now the third longestlived president, after Gerald Ford and George H. W. Bush. He was the first U.S. president to die in the 21st century, and his was the first state funeral in the United States since that of President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1973. His burial site is inscribed with the words he delivered at the opening of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library I know in my heart that man is good, that what is right will always eventually triumph and that there is purpose and worth to each and every life. Legacy A bronze statue of Reagan standing in the Capitol rotunda Since Reagan left office in 1989, substantial debate has occurred among scholars, historians, and the general public surrounding his legacy.Andrew L. Johns, ed., A Companion to Ronald Reagan . Supporters have pointed to a more efficient and prosperous economy as a result of Reagans economic policies,Hayward, pp.635 638 foreign policy triumphs including a peaceful end to the Cold War,Beschloss, p. 324 and a restoration of American pride and morale. Proponents also argue Reagan restored faith in the American Dream with his unabated and passionate love for the United States, after a decline in American confidence and selfrespect under Jimmy Carters perceived weak leadership, particularly during the Iran hostage crisis, as well as his gloomy, dreary outlook for the future of the United States during the 1980 election. Critics contend that Reagans economic policies resulted in rising budget deficits, a wider gap in wealth, and an increase in homelessness and that the Iran Contra affair lowered American credibility. Opinions of Reagans legacy among the countrys leading policy makers and journalists differ as well. Edwin Feulner, president of The Heritage Foundation, said that Reagan helped create a safer, freer world and said of his economic policies He took an America suffering from malaise... and made its citizens believe again in their destiny. However, Mark Weisbrot, coDirector of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, contended that Reagans economic policies were mostly a failure while Howard Kurtz of The Washington Post opined that Reagan was a far more controversial figure in his time than the largely gushing obits on television would suggest. Despite the continuing debate surrounding his legacy, many conservative and liberal scholars agree that Reagan has been the most influential president since Franklin D. Roosevelt, leaving his imprint on American politics, diplomacy, culture, and economics through his effective communication, dedicated patriotism and pragmatic compromising. Since he left office, historians have reached a consensus, as summarized by British historian M. J. Heale, who finds that scholars now concur that Reagan rehabilitated conservatism, turned the nation to the right, practiced a considerably pragmatic conservatism that balanced ideology and the constraints of politics, revived faith in the presidency and in American exceptionalism, and contributed to victory in the Cold War.Heale, M.J. in Cheryl Hudson and Gareth Davies, eds. Ronald Reagan and the 1980s Perceptions, Policies, Legacies Palgrave Macmillan p. 250 Cold War President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev meet, 1985 The Cold War was a major political, economic and military endeavor for over four decades, but the confrontation between the two superpowers had decreased dramatically by the end of Reagans presidency. The significance of Reagans role in ending the Cold War has spurred contentious and opinionated debate. That Reagan played a role in contributing to the downfall of the Soviet Union is agreed, but the extent of this role is continuously debated, with many believing that Reagans defense policies, economic policies, military policies and hard line rhetoric against the Soviet Union and Communism, as well as summits with General Secretary Gorbachev played a significant part in ending the Cold War. President Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev at the Geneva Summit in 1985 He was first among post World War II presidents to put into practice the concept that the Soviet Union could be defeated rather than simply negotiated with, a postDtente strategy, a conviction that was vindicated by Gennadi Gerasimov, the Foreign Ministry spokesman under Gorbachev, who said that the Strategic Defense Initiative was very successful blackmail. ...The Soviet economy couldnt endure such competition. Reagans aggressive rhetoric toward the USSR had mixed effects Jeffery W. Knopf observes that being labeled evil probably made no difference to the Soviets but gave encouragement to the EastEuropean citizens opposed to communism. General Secretary Gorbachev said of his former rivals Cold War role was a man who was instrumental in bringing about the end of the Cold War, and deemed him a great president. Gorbachev does not acknowledge a win or loss in the war, but rather a peaceful end he said he was not intimidated by Reagans harsh rhetoric. Margaret Thatcher, former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, said of Reagan, he warned that the Soviet Union had an insatiable drive for military power... but he also sensed it was being eaten away by systemic failures impossible to reform. She later said, Ronald Reagan had a higher claim than any other leader to have won the Cold War for liberty and he did it without a shot being fired. Said Brian Mulroney, former Prime Minister of Canada He enters history as a strong and dramatic player . Former President Lech WaBsa of Poland acknowledged, Reagan was one of the world leaders who made a major contribution to communisms collapse. That Reagan had little or no effect in ending the Cold War is argued with equal weight that Communisms internal weakness had become apparent, and the Soviet Union would have collapsed in the end regardless of who was in power. President Harry S. Trumans policy of containment is also regarded as a force behind the fall of the USSR, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan undermined the Soviet system itself. Domestic and political legacy Reagan in Minnesota, 1982 Reagan reshaped the Republican party, led the modern conservative movement, and altered the political dynamic of the United States. More men voted Republican under Reagan, and Reagan tapped into religious voters. The socalled Reagan Democrats were a result of his presidency. After leaving office, Reagan became an iconic influence within the Republican party. His policies and beliefs have been frequently invoked by Republican presidential candidates since 1988. The 2008 Republican presidential candidates were no exception, for they aimed to liken themselves to him during the primary debates, even imitating his campaign strategies. Republican nominee John McCain frequently said that he came to office as a foot soldier in the Reagan Revolution. Reagans most famous statement regarding the role of smaller government was that Government is not a solution to our problem, government is the problem. Reagan has become an iconic figure in the Republican Party, with praise for his accomplishments part of the standard GOP rhetoric a quarter century after his retirement. Washington Post reporter Carlos Lozada notes how in the 2016 presidential race the main Republican contenders adopted standard GOP Gipper worship, including even Donald Trump, who previously had been skeptical.Carlos Lozada, I just bingeread eight books by Donald Trump. Heres what I learned From memoirs to financial advice to politics, inside the collected writings of Donald J. Trump, Washington Post 30 July, 2015 The period of American history most dominated by Reagan and his policies concerning taxes, welfare, defense, the federal judiciary and the Cold War is known today as the Reagan Era, and emphasizes that the conservative Reagan Revolution, led by Reagan, had a permanent impact on the United States in domestic and foreign policy. The Bill Clinton administration is often treated as an extension of the Reagan Era, as is the George W. Bush administration.Jack Godwin, Clintonomics How Bill Clinton Reengineered the Reagan Revolution Historian Eric Foner noted that the Obama candidacy in 2008 aroused a great deal of wishful thinking among those yearning for a change after nearly thirty years of Reaganism.Eric Foner, Obama the Professional, The Nation Jan. 14, 2010 Cultural and political image According to columnist Chuck Raasch, Reagan transformed the American presidency in ways that only a few have been able to. He redefined the political agenda of the times, advocating lower taxes, a conservative economic philosophy, and a stronger military. His role in the Cold War further enhanced his image as a different kind of leader. Reagans avuncular style, optimism, and plainfolks demeanor also helped him turn governmentbashing into an art form. President Reagans approval ratings Date Event Approval Disapproval March 30, 1981 Shot by Hinckley 73 19 January 22, 1983 High unemployment 42 54 April 26, 1986 Libya bombing 70 26 February 26, 1987 Iran Contra affair 44 51 December 27 29, 1988 Near end of presidency 63 29 Career average 57 39 July 30, 2001 64 27 As a sitting president, Reagan did not have the highest approval ratings, but his popularity has increased since 1989. Gallup polls in 2001 and 2007 ranked him number one or number two when correspondents were asked for the greatest president in history. Reagan ranked third of post World War II presidents in a 2007 Rasmussen Reports poll, fifth in an ABC 2000 poll, ninth in another 2007 Rasmussen poll, and eighth in a late 2008 poll by British newspaper The Times . In a Siena College survey of over 200 historians, however, Reagan ranked sixteenth out of 42. While the debate about Reagans legacy is ongoing, the 2009 Annual CSPAN Survey of Presidential Leaders ranked Reagan the 10th greatest president. The survey of leading historians rated Reagan number 11 in 2000. Approval ratings for President Reagan In 2011, the Institute for the Study of the Americas released the first ever British academic survey to rate U.S. presidents. This poll of British specialists in U.S. history and politics placed Reagan as the eighth greatest U.S. president. Reagans ability to connect with Americans earned him the laudatory moniker The Great Communicator. Of it, Reagan said, I won the nickname the great communicator. But I never thought it was my style that made a difference it was the content. I wasnt a great communicator, but I communicated great things. His age and softspoken speech gave him a warm grandfatherly image. Reagan also earned the nickname the Teflon President, in that public perceptions of him were not tarnished by the controversies that arose during his administration. According to Colorado congresswoman Patricia Schroeder, who coined the phrase, and reporter Howard Kurtz, the epithet referred to Reagans ability to do almost anything wrong and not get blamed for it. Public reaction to Reagan was always mixed the oldest president up to that time was supported by young voters, and began an alliance that shifted many of them to the Republican party. Reagan did not fare well with minority groups, especially AfricanAmericans. This was largely due to his opposition to affirmative action policies. However, his support of Israel throughout his presidency earned him support from many Jews. He emphasized family values in his campaigns and during his presidency, although he was the first president to have been divorced. The combination of Reagans speaking style, unabashed patriotism, negotiation skills, as well as his savvy use of the media, played an important role in defining the 1980s and his future legacy. President Reagan clowning with Muhammad Ali in the Oval Office, 1983 Reagan was known to joke frequently during his lifetime, displayed humor throughout his presidency, and was famous for his storytelling. His numerous jokes and oneliners have been labeled classic quips and legendary. Among the most notable of his jokes was one regarding the Cold War. As a microphone test in preparation for his weekly radio address in August 1984, Reagan made the following joke My fellow Americans, Im pleased to tell you today that Ive signed legislation that will outlaw Russia forever. We begin bombing in five minutes. Former aide David Gergen commented, It was that humor... that I think endeared people to Reagan. Reagan was a fan of Jelly Beans. He picked up the liking when he gave up pipe smoking. He would often have jars of the popular candy treat accessible during cabinet meetings. Honors Reagan received a number of awards in his pre and postpresidential years. After his election as president, Reagan received a lifetime gold membership in the Screen Actors Guild, was inducted into the National Speakers Association Speaker Hall of Fame, and received the United States Military Academys Sylvanus Thayer Award. In 1981, Reagan was inducted as a Laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln by the Governor of Illinois in the area of Government. In 1983, he received the highest distinction of the Scout Association of Japan, the Golden Pheasant Award. In 1989, Reagan was made an Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, one of the highest British orders only two U.S. presidents have received this honor since attaining office, Reagan and George H. W. Bush., while Dwight D. Eisenhower received his before becoming President in his capacity as a general after World War II. Reagan was also named an honorary Fellow of Keble College, Oxford. Japan awarded him the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Chrysanthemum in 1989 he was the second U.S. president to receive the order and the first to have it given to him for personal reasons . Former President Reagan returns to the White House to receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Bush, 1993 On January 18, 1993, Reagan received the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the highest honor that the United States can bestow, from President George H. W. Bush, his Vice President and successor. Reagan was also awarded the Republican Senatorial Medal of Freedom, the highest honor bestowed by Republican members of the Senate. On Reagans 87th birthday, in 1998, Washington National Airport was renamed Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport by a bill signed into law by President Bill Clinton. That year, the Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center was dedicated in Washington, D.C. He was among 18 included in Gallups most admired man and woman poll of the 20th century, from a poll conducted in the U.S. in 1999 two years later, was christened by Nancy Reagan and the United States Navy. It is one of few Navy ships christened in honor of a living person and the first aircraft carrier to be named in honor of a living former president. In 1998 the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation awarded Reagan its Naval Heritage award for his support of the U.S. Navy and military in both his film career and while he served as president. Congress authorized the creation of the Ronald Reagan Boyhood Home in Dixon, Illinois in 2002, pending federal purchase of the property. On May 16 of that year, Nancy Reagan accepted the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest civilian honor bestowed by Congress, on behalf of the president and herself. After Reagans death, the United States Postal Service issued a President Ronald Reagan commemorative postage stamp in 2005. Later in the year, CNN, along with the editors of Time magazine, named him the most fascinating person of the networks first 25 years Time listed Reagan one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century as well. The Discovery Channel asked its viewers to vote for The Greatest American in June 2005 Reagan placed in first place, ahead of Lincoln and Martin Luther King Jr. In 2006, Reagan was inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum. Every year from 2002, California governors Gray Davis and Arnold Schwarzenegger proclaimed February 6 Ronald Reagan Day in the state of California in honor of their most famous predecessor. In 2010, Schwarzenegger signed Senate Bill 944, authored by Senator George Runner, to make every February 6 Ronald Reagan Day in California. In 2007, Polish President Lech KaczyDski posthumously conferred on Reagan the highest Polish distinction, the Order of the White Eagle, saying that Reagan had inspired the Polish people to work for change and helped to unseat the repressive communist regime KaczyDski said it would not have been possible if it was not for the toughmindedness, determination, and feeling of mission of President Ronald Reagan. Reagan backed the nation of Poland throughout his presidency, supporting the anticommunist Solidarity movement, along with Pope John Paul II the Ronald Reagan Park, a public facility in GdaDsk, was named in his honor. On June 3, 2009, Nancy Reagan unveiled a statue of her late husband in the United States Capitol rotunda. The statue represents the state of California in the National Statuary Hall Collection. After Reagans death, both major American political parties agreed to erect a statue of Reagan in the place of that of Thomas Starr King. The day before, President Obama signed the Ronald Reagan Centennial Commission Act into law, establishing a commission to plan activities to mark the upcoming centenary of Reagans birth. Independence Day 2011 saw the unveiling of another statue to Reagan this time in the British capital of London, outside the U.S. embassy in Grosvenor Square. The unveiling was supposed to be attended by Reagans wife Nancy, but she did not attend former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice took her place and read a statement on her behalf further to the former First Ladys absence, President Reagans friend and British prime minister during his presidency, Baroness Thatcher, was also unable to attend due to frail health. Portraits FileRonald Reagan with family 191617.jpg 1916 17. Pictured from left Father Jack, older brother Neil, Reagan , and mother Nelle FileRonald Reagan in Dixon, Illinois, 1920s.jpg1920s. As a teenager, in Dixon, Illinois FileRonald Reagan and General Electric Theater 195462.jpg. Hosting General Electric Theater FileRonald Reagan with cowboy hat 120071M edit.jpg1976. At his home at Rancho del Cielo FileAmericoMakk2CPresentationofPortraittoPresidentReagan.JPGPresentation of Americo Makk Portrait to President Reagan, 1984 See also List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience Political positions of Ronald Reagan Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps Ronald Reagan bibliography References Sources Brands, H.W. Reagan The Life Holden, Kenneth. Making of the Great Communicator Ronald Reagans Transformation From Actor To Governor Putnam, Jackson K. Governor Reagan A Reappraisal. California History 24 45. in JSTOR Further reading Primary sources Historiography Johns, Andrew L., ed. A Companion to Ronald Reagan . xiv, 682 pp. topical essays by scholars emphasizing historiography contents free at many libraries External links Official sites Ronald Reagan Foundation Presidential Library White House biography Ronald Reagan His Legacy at Eureka College Media Life Portrait of Ronald Reagan, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , December 6, 1999 Ronald Reagan audio archives at NPR Ronald Reagan Oral Histories from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Television ads from Reagans 1976 campaign for the Republican presidential nomination, which among the Citizens for Reagan records at the Hoover Institution Archives Timeline at PBS News coverage Ronald Reagan from The Washington Post Ronald Reagan at CNN Essays and historiographies Essays on Ronald Reagan, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs The Presidents Reagan, an American Experience documentary Other Ronald Reagans Personal Manuscripts Category1911 births Category2004 deaths Category20thcentury American male actors Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury American writers CategoryAmerican actorpoliticians CategoryAmerican anticommunists CategoryAmerican autobiographers CategoryAmerican diarists CategoryAmerican Disciples of Christ CategoryAmerican labor leaders CategoryAmerican male film actors CategoryAmerican male writers CategoryAmerican military personnel of World War II CategoryAmerican radio personalities CategoryAmerican shooting survivors CategoryAmerican television personalities CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryBohemian Club members CategoryBurials in Ventura County, California CategoryCalifornia Republicans CategoryCancer survivors CategoryChicago Cubs broadcasters CategoryCollege football announcers CategoryCollege mens swimmers in the United States CategoryColorectal cancer survivors CategoryCongressional Gold Medal recipients CategoryConservatism in the United States CategoryDeaths from Alzheimers disease CategoryDeaths from pneumonia CategoryEureka Red Devils football players CategoryFBI informants CategoryFirst Motion Picture Unit personnel CategoryGeneral Electric people CategoryGovernors of California CategoryGrand Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryHonorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath CategoryIllinois Republicans CategoryInfectious disease deaths in California CategoryIran Contra affair CategoryMajor League Baseball broadcasters CategoryMale actors from California CategoryMale actors from Illinois CategoryMilitary personnel from California CategoryMilitary personnel from Illinois CategoryNational Radio Hall of Fame inductees CategoryNational Rifle Association people CategoryNew Right CategoryPeople from Dixon, Illinois CategoryPeople from the Greater Los Angeles Area CategoryPeople from Tampico, Illinois CategoryPeople of the Soviet Afghan War CategoryPresidential Medal of Freedom recipients CategoryPresidents of the Screen Actors Guild CategoryPresidents of the United States Ronald CategoryRecipients of the Order pro merito Melitensi CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party state governors of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategorySkin cancer survivors CategoryUnited States Army officers CategoryUnited States Army Air Forces officers CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1968 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1976 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1980 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1984 CategoryWarner Bros. contract players CategoryWriters from California CategoryWriters fromIllinois
Richard Milhous Nixon was the 37th President of the United States from 1969 until 1974, when he resigned from office, the only U.S. president to do so. He had previously served as the 36th Vice President of the United States from 1953 to 1961, and prior to that as a U.S. Representative and also Senator from California. Nixon was born in Yorba Linda, California. After completing his undergraduate studies at Whittier College, he graduated from Duke University School of Law in 1937 and returned to California to practice law. He and his wife Pat moved to Washington in 1942 to work for the federal government. He subsequently served on active duty in the U.S. Navy Reserve during World War II. Nixon was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946 and to the Senate in 1950. His pursuit of the Hiss Case established his reputation as a leading anticommunist and elevated him to national prominence. He was the running mate of Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Republican Party presidential nominee in the 1952 election. Nixon served for eight years as vice president at 40, the secondyoungest vice president in history. He waged an unsuccessful presidential campaign in 1960, narrowly losing to John F. Kennedy, and lost a race for Governor of California to Pat Brown in 1962. In 1968, he ran for the presidency again and was elected, defeating incumbent Vice President Hubert Humphrey. Nixon ended American involvement in the war in Vietnam in 1973 and brought the American POWs home, and ended the military draft. Nixons visit to China in 1972 eventually led to diplomatic relations between the two nations, and he initiated dtente and the AntiBallistic Missile Treaty with the Soviet Union the same year. His administration generally transferred power from Washington D.C. to the states. He imposed wage and price controls for ninety days, enforced desegregation of Southern schools and established the Environmental Protection Agency. Nixon also presided over the Apollo 11 moon landing, which signaled the end of the moon race. He was reelected in one of the largest electoral landslides in U.S. history in 1972 when he defeated George McGovern. In his second term, Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses in the Yom Kippur War, resulting in the restart of the Middle East peace process and an oil crisis at home. The Nixon administration supported a coup in Chile that ousted the government of Salvador Allende and propelled Augusto Pinochet to power. By late 1973, the Watergate scandal escalated, costing Nixon much of his political support. On August 9, 1974, he resigned in the face of almost certain impeachment and removal from office. After his resignation, he was issued a pardon by his successor, Gerald Ford. In 20 years of retirement, Nixon wrote nine books and undertook many foreign trips, helping to rehabilitate his image into that of elder statesman. He suffered a debilitating stroke on April 18, 1994 and died four days later at the age of 81. Early life Richard Milhous Nixon was born on January 9, 1913 in Yorba Linda, California, in a house that was built by his father. His parents were Hannah Nixon and Francis A. Nixon. His mother was a Quaker, and his father converted from Methodism to the Quaker faith. Nixon was a descendant of the early American settler, Thomas Cornell, who was also an ancestor of Ezra Cornell, the founder of Cornell University, as well as of Jimmy Carter and Bill Gates.Reitwiesner, William Addams The Ancestors of Senator John Forbes Kerry Accessed August 31, 2016 Nixons upbringing was marked by evangelical Quaker observances of the time, such as refraining from alcohol, dancing, and swearing. Nixon had four brothers Harold , Donald , Arthur , and Edward . Four of the five Nixon boys were named after kings who had ruled in historical or legendary Britain Richard, for example, was named after Richard the Lionheart. Nixon makes his newspaper debut in 1916, contributing five cents to a fund for war orphans. Donald is to the left of his brother. Nixons early life was marked by hardship, and he later quoted a saying of Eisenhower to describe his boyhood We were poor, but the glory of it was we didnt know it. The Nixon family ranch failed in 1922, and the family moved to Whittier, California. In an area with many Quakers, Frank Nixon opened a grocery store and gas station. Richards younger brother Arthur died in 1925 at the age of seven after a short illness. At the age of twelve, a spot was found on Richards lung, and, with a family history of tuberculosis, he was forbidden to play sports. Eventually, the spot was found to be scar tissue from an early bout of pneumonia. Primary and secondary education Young Richard attended East Whittier Elementary School, where he was president of his eighthgrade class. His parents believed that attending Whittier High School had caused Richards older brother Harold to live a dissolute lifestyle before he fell ill of tuberculosis , and so they sent Richard to the larger Fullerton Union High School. He had to ride a school bus for an hour each way during his freshman year, and he received excellent grades. Later, he lived with an aunt in Fullerton during the week. He played junior varsity football, and seldom missed a practice, even though he was rarely used in games. He had greater success as a debater, winning a number of championships and taking his only formal tutelage in public speaking from Fullertons Head of English, H. Lynn Sheller. Nixon later remembered Shellers words, Remember, speaking is conversation... dont shout at people. Talk to them. Converse with them. Nixon stated that he tried to use the conversational tone as much as possible. Nixon at Whittier High School, 1930 At the start of his junior year beginning in September 1928, Richards parents permitted him to transfer to Whittier High School. At Whittier High, Nixon suffered his first electoral defeat, for student body president. He often rose at 4a.m., to drive the family truck into Los Angeles and purchase vegetables at the market. He then drove to the store to wash and display them, before going to school. Harold had been diagnosed with tuberculosis the previous year when their mother took him to Arizona in the hopes of improving his health, the demands on Richard increased, causing him to give up football. Nevertheless, Richard graduated from Whittier High third in his class of 207students. Collegiate and law school education Nixon was offered a tuition grant to attend Harvard University, but Harolds continued illness and the need for their mother to care for him meant Richard was needed at the store. He remained in his hometown and attended Whittier College, his expenses there covered by a bequest from his maternal grandfather. Nixon played for the basketball team he also tried out for football but lacked the size to play. He remained on the team as a substitute and was noted for his enthusiasm. Instead of fraternities and sororities, Whittier had literary societies. Nixon was snubbed by the only one for men, the Franklins many members of the Franklins were from prominent families, but Nixon was not. He responded by helping to found a new society, the Orthogonian Society. In addition to the society, schoolwork, and work at the store, Nixon found time for a large number of extracurricular activities, becoming a champion debater and gaining a reputation as a hard worker. In 1933, he became engaged to Ola Florence Welch, daughter of the Whittier police chief. The two broke up in 1935. After his graduation from Whittier in 1934, Nixon received a full scholarship to attend Duke University School of Law. The school was new and sought to attract top students by offering scholarships. It paid high salaries to its professors, many of whom had national or international reputations. The number of scholarships was greatly reduced for second and thirdyear students, forcing recipients into intense competition. Nixon not only kept his scholarship but was elected president of the Duke Bar Association, inducted into the Order of the Coif, and graduated third in his class in June 1937. Early career and marriage After graduating from Duke, Nixon initially hoped to join the Federal Bureau of Investigation. He received no response to his letter of application and learned years later that he had been hired, but his appointment had been canceled at the last minute due to budget cuts. Instead, he returned to California and was admitted to the bar in 1937. He began practicing with the law firm Wingert and Bewley in Whittier, working on commercial litigation for local petroleum companies and other corporate matters, as well as on wills. In later years, Nixon proudly stated that he was the only modern president to have previously worked as a practicing attorney. Nixon was reluctant to work on divorce cases, disliking frank sexual talk from women. In 1938, he opened up his own branch of Wingert and Bewley in La Habra, California, and became a full partner in the firm the following year. In January 1938, Nixon was cast in the Whittier Community Players production of The Dark Tower . There he played opposite a high school teacher named Thelma Pat Ryan. Nixon described it in his memoirs as a case of love at first sight for Nixon only, as Pat Ryan turned down the young lawyer several times before agreeing to date him. Once they began their courtship, Ryan was reluctant to marry Nixon they dated for two years before she assented to his proposal. They wed in a small ceremony on June 21, 1940. After a honeymoon in Mexico, the Nixons began their married life in Whittier. They had two daughters, Tricia and Julie . World War II In January 1942, the couple moved to Washington, D.C., where Nixon took a job at the Office of Price Administration. In his political campaigns, Nixon would suggest that this was his response to Pearl Harbor, but he had sought the position throughout the latter part of 1941. Both Nixon and his wife believed he was limiting his prospects by remaining in Whittier. He was assigned to the tire rationing division, where he was tasked with replying to correspondence. He did not enjoy the role, and four months later, applied to join the United States Navy. As a birthright Quaker, he could have claimed exemption from the draft he might also have been deferred because he worked in government service. But instead of exploiting his circumstance, Nixon sought a commission in the navy. His application was successful, and he was appointed a lieutenant junior grade in the U.S Naval Reserve on June 15, 1942. In October 1942, he was assigned as aide to the commander of the Naval Air Station Ottumwa in Iowa until May 1943. On October 1, 1943, Nixon was promoted to lieutenant. Seeking more excitement, he requested sea duty and was reassigned as the naval passenger control officer for the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command, supporting the logistics of operations in the South West Pacific theater he was the Officer in Charge of the Combat Air Transport Command at Guadalcanal in the Solomons and in March 1944 at Green Island just north of Bougainville. His unit prepared manifests and flight plans for C47 operations and supervised the loading and unloading of the cargo aircraft. For this service, he received a Navy Letter of Commendation from his commanding officer for meritorious and efficient performance of duty as Officer in Charge of the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command. Upon his return to the U.S., Nixon was appointed the administrative officer of the Alameda Naval Air Station in California. In January 1945, he was transferred to the Bureau of Aeronautics office in Philadelphia to help negotiate the termination of war contracts, and received his second letter of commendation, from the Secretary of the Navy for meritorious service, tireless effort, and devotion to duty. Later, Nixon was transferred to other offices to work on contracts and finally to Baltimore. On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander. On March 10, 1946, he was relieved of active duty. He resigned his commission on New Years Day 1946. On June 1, 1953, he was promoted to commander. He retired in the U.S. Naval Reserve on June 6, 1966. Navy and Marine CorpsCommendation Medal American Campaign Medal AsiaticPacific Campaign Medalwith two stars World War II Victory Medal Armed Forces Reserve Medalwith silver hourglass device Rising politician Richard and Pat Nixon introduce General Dwight D. Eisenhower Richard Nixons running mate to their daughters Tricia and Julie , Washington National Airport, September 10, 1952. Congressional career House of Representatives Nixons congressional campaign flyer In 1945, Republicans in Californias 12th congressional district, frustrated by their inability to defeat Democratic Congressman Jerry Voorhis, sought a consensus candidate who would run a strong campaign against him. They formed a Committee of 100 to decide on a candidate, hoping to avoid internal dissensions which had led to Voorhis victories. After the committee failed to attract higherprofile candidates, Herman Perry, Whittiers Bank of America branch manager, suggested Nixon, a family friend with whom he had served on the Whittier College Board of Trustees before the war. Perry wrote to Nixon in Baltimore. After a night of excited talk between the Nixons, the naval officer responded to Perry with enthusiasm. Nixon flew to California and was selected by the committee. When he left the Navy at the start of 1946, Nixon and his wife returned to Whittier, where Nixon began a year of intensive campaigning. He contended that Voorhis had been ineffective as a congressman and suggested that Voorhiss endorsement by a group linked to communists meant that Voorhis must have radical views. Nixon won the election, receiving 65,586 votes to Voorhis 49,994. Nixon campaigning for the Senate, 1950 In Congress, Nixon supported the Taft Hartley Act of 1947, a federal law that monitors the activities and power of labor unions, and he served on the Education and Labor Committee. He was part of the Herter Committee, which went to Europe to report on the need for U.S. foreign aid. Nixon was the youngest member of the committee and the only Westerner. Advocacy by Herter Committee members, including Nixon, led to congressional passage of the Marshall Plan. In his memoirs, Nixon recounts that he joined the House UnAmerican Activities Committee at the end of 1947. However, he was already a HUAC member in early February 1947, when he heard Enemy Number One Gerhard Eisler and his sister Ruth Fischer testify. On February 18, 1947, Nixon referred to Eislers belligerence toward HUAC in his maiden speech to the House. Also by early February 1947, fellow U.S. Representative Charles J. Kersten had introduced him to Father John Francis Cronin in Baltimore, who shared with Nixon his 1945 privately circulated paper The Problem of American Communism in 1945, with much information from the FBIs William C. Sullivan . By May 1948, Nixon had cosponsored a MundtNixon Bill to implement a new approach to the complicated problem of internal communist subversion... It provided for registration of all Communist Party members and required a statement of the source of all printed and broadcast material issued by organizations that were found to be Communist fronts. He served as floor manager for the Republican Party Vito Marcantonio served as floor manager for the Democratic Party. On May 19, 1948, the bill passed the House by 319 to 58 but failed to pass the Senate. Nixon first gained national attention in August 1948 when as a HUAC member, his persistence helped break the Alger Hiss spy case. While many doubted Whittaker Chambers allegations that Hiss, a former State Department official, had been a Soviet spy, Nixon believed them to be true and pressed for the committee to continue its investigation. Under suit for defamation filed by Hiss, Chambers produced documents corroborating his allegations. These included paper and microfilm copies that Chambers turned over to House investigators after having hidden them overnight in a field they became known as the Pumpkin Papers. Hiss was convicted of perjury in 1950 for denying under oath he had passed documents to Chambers. In 1948, Nixon successfully crossfiled as a candidate in his district, winning both major party primaries, and was comfortably reelected. Senate Nixon on his station wagon tour in Sausalito, California, 1950 In 1949, Nixon began to consider running for the United States Senate against the Democratic incumbent, Sheridan Downey, and entered the race in November. Downey, faced with a bitter primary battle with Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas, announced his retirement in March 1950. Nixon and Douglas won the primary elections and engaged in a contentious campaign in which the ongoing Korean War was a major issue. Nixon tried to focus attention on Douglas liberal voting record. As part of that effort, a Pink Sheet was distributed by the Nixon campaign suggesting that, as Douglas voting record was similar to that of New York Congressman Vito Marcantonio , their political views must be nearly identical. Nixon won the election by almost twenty percentage points. During this campaign, Nixon was first called Tricky Dick by his opponents for his campaign tactics. In the Senate, Nixon took a prominent position in opposing global communism, traveling frequently and speaking out against it. He maintained friendly relations with his fellow anticommunist, the controversial Wisconsin senator, Joseph McCarthy, but was careful to keep some distance between himself and McCarthys allegations. Nixon also criticized President Harry S. Trumans handling of the Korean War. He supported statehood for Alaska and Hawaii, voted in favor of civil rights for minorities, and supported federal disaster relief for India and Yugoslavia. He voted against price controls and other monetary restrictions, benefits for illegal immigrants, and public power. Vice Presidency General Dwight D. Eisenhower was nominated for president by the Republicans in 1952. He had no strong preference for a vice presidential candidate, and Republican officeholders and party officials met in a smokefilled room and recommended Nixon to the general, who agreed to the senators selection. Nixons youth , stance against communism, and political base in California one of the largest states were all seen as votewinners by the leaders. Among the candidates considered along with Nixon were Ohio Senator Robert A. Taft, New Jersey Governor Alfred Driscoll and Illinois Senator Everett Dirksen. On the campaign trail, Eisenhower spoke to his plans for the country, leaving the negative campaigning to his running mate. Front cover of literature for the Eisenhower Nixon campaign, 1952 In midSeptember, the Republican ticket faced a major crisis.John W. Malsberger, Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and the Fund Crisis of 1952, Historian, 73 , pp 526 47. The media reported that Nixon had a political fund, maintained by his backers, which reimbursed him for political expenses. Such a fund was not illegal, but it exposed Nixon to allegations of possible conflict of interest. With pressure building for Eisenhower to demand Nixons resignation from the ticket, the senator went on television to deliver an address to the nation on September 23, 1952. The address, later termed the Checkers speech, was heard by about 60 million Americans including the largest television audience up to that point. Nixon emotionally defended himself, stating that the fund was not secret, nor had donors received special favors. He painted himself as a man of modest means and a patriot. The speech would be remembered for the gift which Nixon had received, but which he would not give back a little cocker spaniel dog sent all the way from Texas. And our little girl Tricia, the 6yearold named it Checkers. The speech prompted a huge public outpouring of support for Nixon. Eisenhower decided to retain him on the ticket, which proved victorious in the November election. Eisenhower gave Nixon responsibilities during his term as vice president more than any previous vice president.John W. Malsberger, The General and the Politician Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and American Politics Nixon attended Cabinet and National Security Council meetings and chaired them when Eisenhower was absent. A 1953 tour of the Far East succeeded in increasing local goodwill toward the United States and prompted Nixon to appreciate the potential of the region as an industrial center. He visited Saigon and Hanoi in French Indochina. On his return to the United States at the end of 1953, Nixon increased the amount of time he devoted to foreign relations. Biographer Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixons congressional years, said of his vice presidency Despite intense campaigning by Nixon, who reprised his strong attacks on the Democrats, the Republicans lost control of both houses of Congress in the 1954 elections. These losses caused Nixon to contemplate leaving politics once he had served out his term. On September 24, 1955, President Eisenhower suffered a heart attack his condition was initially believed to be lifethreatening. Eisenhower was unable to perform his duties for six weeks. The 25th Amendment to the United States Constitution had not yet been proposed, and the Vice President had no formal power to act. Nonetheless, Nixon acted in Eisenhowers stead during this period, presiding over Cabinet meetings and ensuring that aides and Cabinet officers did not seek power. According to Nixon biographer Stephen Ambrose, Nixon had earned the high praise he received for his conduct during the crisis... he made no attempt to seize power. His spirits buoyed, Nixon sought a second term, but some of Eisenhowers aides aimed to displace him. In a December 1955 meeting, Eisenhower proposed that Nixon not run for reelection in order to give him administrative experience before a 1960 presidential run and instead become a Cabinet officer in a second Eisenhower administration. Nixon believed such an action would destroy his political career. When Eisenhower announced his reelection bid in February 1956, he hedged on the choice of his running mate, stating that it was improper to address that question until he had been renominated. Although no Republican was opposing Eisenhower, Nixon received a substantial number of writein votes against the President in the 1956 New Hampshire primary election. In late April, the President announced that Nixon would again be his running mate. Eisenhower and Nixon were reelected by a comfortable margin in the November 1956 election. Vice President Nixon and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev speak as the press looks on in part of what came to be known as the Kitchen Debate, July 24, 1959. In early 1957, Nixon undertook another major foreign trip, this time to Africa. On his return, he helped shepherd the Civil Rights Act of 1957 through Congress. The bill was weakened in the Senate, and civil rights leaders were divided over whether Eisenhower should sign it. Nixon advised the President to sign the bill, which he did. Eisenhower suffered a mild stroke in November 1957, and Nixon gave a press conference, assuring the nation that the Cabinet was functioning well as a team during Eisenhowers brief illness. On April 27, 1958, Richard and Pat Nixon embarked on a goodwill tour of South America. In Montevideo, Uruguay, Nixon made an impromptu visit to a college campus, where he fielded questions from students on U.S. foreign policy. The trip was uneventful until the Nixon party reached Lima, Peru, where he was met with student demonstrations. Nixon went to the campus, got out of his car to confront the students, and stayed until forced back into the car by a volley of thrown objects. At his hotel, Nixon faced another mob, and one demonstrator spat on him. In Caracas, Venezuela, Nixon and his wife were spat on by antiAmerican demonstrators and their limousine was attacked by a pipewielding mob. According to Ambrose, Nixons courageous conduct caused even some of his bitterest enemies to give him some grudging respect. In July 1959, President Eisenhower sent Nixon to the Soviet Union for the opening of the American National Exhibition in Moscow. On July 24, while touring the exhibits with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, the two stopped at a model of an American kitchen and engaged in an impromptu exchange about the merits of capitalism versus communism that became known as the Kitchen Debate. 1960 and 1962 elections wilderness years 1960 electoral vote results In 1960, Nixon launched his first campaign for President of the United States. He faced little opposition in the Republican primaries and chose former Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. as his running mate. His Democratic opponent was John F. Kennedy, and the race remained close for the duration. Nixon campaigned on his experience, but Kennedy called for new blood and claimed the Eisenhower Nixon administration had allowed the Soviet Union to overtake the U.S. in ballistic missiles . A new political medium was introduced in the campaign televised presidential debates. In the first of four such debates, Nixon appeared pale, with a five oclock shadow, in contrast to the photogenic Kennedy. Nixons performance in the debate was perceived to be mediocre in the visual medium of television, though many people listening on the radio thought that Nixon had won. Nixon lost the election narrowly, with Kennedy ahead by only 112,827 votes in the popular vote. Outgoing Vice President Nixon and incoming Vice President Lyndon Johnson leave the White House on the morning of January 20, 1961, for the Kennedy Johnson inauguration ceremonies There were charges of vote fraud in Texas and Illinois, both states won by Kennedy Nixon refused to consider contesting the election, feeling a lengthy controversy would diminish the United States in the eyes of the world, and the uncertainty would hurt U.S. interests. At the end of his term of office as vice president in January 1961, Nixon and his family returned to California, where he practiced law and wrote a bestselling book, Six Crises , which included coverage of the Hiss case, Eisenhowers heart attack, and the Fund Crisis, which had been resolved by the Checkers speech. Local and national Republican leaders encouraged Nixon to challenge incumbent Pat Brown for Governor of California in the 1962 election. Despite initial reluctance, Nixon entered the race. The campaign was clouded by public suspicion that Nixon viewed the office as a steppingstone for another presidential run, some opposition from the farright of the party, and his own lack of interest in being Californias governor. Nixon hoped that a successful run would confirm him in his status as the nations leading active Republican politician, and ensure he remained a major player in national politics. Instead, he lost to Brown by more than five percentage points, and the defeat was widely believed to be the end of his political career. In an impromptu concession speech the morning after the election, Nixon blamed the media for favoring his opponent, saying, You wont have Nixon to kick around anymore because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference. The California defeat was highlighted in the November 11, 1962, episode of ABCs Howard K. Smith News and Comment entitled The Political Obituary of Richard M. Nixon. Alger Hiss appeared on the program, and many members of the public complained that it was unseemly to allow a convicted felon air time to attack a former vice president. The furor drove Smith and his program from the air, and public sympathy for Nixon grew. Nixon shows his papers to an East German officer to cross between the sectors of the divided city of Berlin, 1963 The Nixon family traveled to Europe in 1963, where Nixon gave press conferences and met with leaders of the countries he visited. The family moved to New York City, where Nixon became a senior partner in the leading law firm Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie Alexander. Nixon had pledged, when announcing his California campaign, not to run for president in 1964 even if he had not, he believed it would be difficult to defeat Kennedy, or after his assassination, Kennedys successor, Lyndon Johnson. In 1964, he supported Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater for the Republican nomination for president when Goldwater was successful in gaining the nomination, Nixon was selected to introduce the candidate to the convention. Although he thought Goldwater unlikely to win, Nixon campaigned for him loyally. The election was a disaster for the Republicans Goldwaters landslide loss to Johnson was matched by heavy losses for the party in Congress and among state governors. Nixon was one of the few leading Republicans not blamed for the disastrous results, and he sought to build on that in the 1966 congressional elections. He campaigned for many Republicans seeking to regain seats lost in the Johnson landslide and received credit for helping the Republicans make major gains in the midterm election. 1968 presidential election Nixon and Johnson meet at the White House before Nixons nomination, July 1968 Facsimile of a Nixon campaign poster At the end of 1967, Nixon told his family he planned to run for president a second time. Although Pat Nixon did not always enjoy public life , she was supportive of her husbands ambitions. Nixon believed that with the Democrats torn over the issue of the Vietnam War, a Republican had a good chance of winning, although he expected the election to be as close as in 1960. Text on automobile trash bag given away by the Nixon campaign in California, 1968 1968 electoral vote results One of the most tumultuous primary election seasons ever began as the Tet Offensive was launched, followed by the withdrawal of President Johnson as a candidate after doing unexpectedly poorly in the New Hampshire primary it concluded with the assassination of one of the Democratic candidates, Senator Robert F. Kennedy, just moments after his victory in the California primary. On the Republican side, Nixons main opposition was Michigan Governor George Romney, though New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller and California Governor Ronald Reagan each hoped to be nominated in a brokered convention. Nixon secured the nomination on the first ballot. He selected Maryland Governor Spiro Agnew as his running mate, a choice which Nixon believed would unite the party, appealing to both Northern moderates and Southerners disaffected with the Democrats. Nixons Democratic opponent in the general election was Vice President Hubert Humphrey, who was nominated at a convention marked by violent protests. Throughout the campaign, Nixon portrayed himself as a figure of stability during a period of national unrest and upheaval. He appealed to what he later called the silent majority of socially conservative Americans who disliked the hippie counterculture and the antiwar demonstrators. Agnew became an increasingly vocal critic of these groups, solidifying Nixons position with the right. Nixon waged a prominent television advertising campaign, meeting with supporters in front of cameras. He stressed that the crime rate was too high, and attacked what he perceived as a surrender by the Democrats of the United States nuclear superiority. Nixon promised peace with honor in the Vietnam War and proclaimed that new leadership will end the war and win the peace in the Pacific. He did not release specifics of how he hoped to end the war, resulting in media intimations that he must have a secret plan. His slogan of Nixons the One proved to be effective. Johnsons negotiators hoped to reach a truce in Vietnam prior to the election. Nixon received astute analysis on the talks from Henry Kissinger, then a consultant to U.S. negotiator Averell Harriman, and his campaign was in regular contact with Anna Chennault . She advised South Vietnamese president Thieu not to go to Paris to join the talks, hinting that Nixon would give him a better deal if elected. Johnson was aware of what was going on, as he had both Chennault and the South Vietnamese ambassador to Washington bugged, and was enraged by what he considered an attempt by Nixon to undermine U.S. foreign policy. On October 31, with no agreement, Johnson announced a unilateral halt to the bombing, and that peace negotiations would start in Paris on November 6, the day after Election Day. On November 2, after speaking with Chennault again, Thieu stated he would not go to Paris. Johnson telephoned Nixon, who denied any involvement the President did not believe him. Johnson felt he could not publicly mention Chennaults involvement, which had been obtained by wiretapping, but told Humphrey, who chose not to use the information.Richard Nixon Campaigns and Elections , Miller Center, a nonpartisan institute that seeks to expand understanding of the presidency, policy, and political history, University of Virginia, Consulting Editor Ken Hughes. In late 2016, historian John Farrell publicized notes in which Haldeman wrote down Nixons instructions during the campaign . In an October 22, 1968 phone call with Nixon, Haldeman wrote, Any other way to monkey wrench it Anything RN can do, and Keep Anna Chennault working on SVN Vietnam. It is not clear whether the government of South Vietnam needed much encouragement to opt out of a peace process they considered disadvantageous.Nixon Tried to Spoil Johnson s Vietnam Peace Talks in 68, Notes Show, New York Times , Politics Section, Peter Baker, Jan. 2, 2017. See also H.R. Haldemans Notes from Oct. 22, 1968, NY Times , Dec. 31, 2016, which reprints four pages of Haldemans notes. In a threeway race between Nixon, Humphrey, and American Independent Party candidate former Alabama Governor George Wallace, Nixon defeated Humphrey by nearly 500,000 votes , with 301 electoral votes to 191 for Humphrey and 46 for Wallace. In his victory speech, Nixon pledged that his administration would try to bring the divided nation together. Nixon said I have received a very gracious message from the Vice President, congratulating me for winning the election. I congratulated him for his gallant and courageous fight against great odds. I also told him that I know exactly how he felt. I know how it feels to lose a close one. Presidency Nixon is sworn in as the 37th President by Chief Justice Earl Warren on January 20, 1969, with the new First Lady, Pat, holding the family Bibles. Nixon was inaugurated as president on January 20, 1969, sworn in by his onetime political rival, Chief Justice Earl Warren. Pat Nixon held the family Bibles open at Isaiah 24, which reads, They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks. In his inaugural address, which received almost uniformly positive reviews, Nixon remarked that the greatest honor history can bestow is the title of peacemaker a phrase that would later be placed on his gravestone. He spoke about turning partisan politics into a new age of unity Foreign policy Nixon and Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai toast during Nixons 1972 visit to China China President Nixon shakes hands with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai upon arriving in Beijing, 1972 Nixon laid the groundwork for his overture to China before he became president, writing in Foreign Affairs a year before his election There is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation. Assisting him in this venture was his National Security Advisor and future Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, with whom the President worked closely, bypassing Cabinet officials. With relations between the Soviet Union and China at a nadir border clashes between the two took place during Nixons first year in office Nixon sent private word to the Chinese that he desired closer relations. A breakthrough came in early 1971, when Chairman Mao invited a team of American table tennis players to visit China and play against top Chinese players. Nixon followed up by sending Kissinger to China for clandestine meetings with Chinese officials. On July 15, 1971, it was simultaneously announced by Beijing and by Nixon that the President would visit China the following February. The announcements astounded the world. The secrecy allowed both sets of leaders time to prepare the political climate in their countries for the contact. In February 1972, Nixon and his wife traveled to China. Kissinger briefed Nixon for over 40hours in preparation. Upon touching down, the President and First Lady emerged from Air Force One and greeted Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai. Nixon made a point of shaking Zhous hand, something which thenSecretary of State John Foster Dulles had refused to do in 1954 when the two met in Geneva. Over 100television journalists accompanied the president. On Nixons orders, television was strongly favored over printed publications, as Nixon felt that the medium would capture the visit much better than print. It also gave him the opportunity to snub the print journalists he despised. Nixon and Kissinger met for an hour with Mao and Zhou at Maos official private residence, where they discussed a range of issues. Mao later told his doctor that he had been impressed by Nixon, whom he considered forthright, unlike the leftists and the Soviets. He said he was suspicious of Kissinger, though the National Security Advisor referred to their meeting as his encounter with history. A formal banquet welcoming the presidential party was given that evening in the Great Hall of the People. The following day, Nixon met with Zhou the joint communique following this meeting recognized Taiwan as a part of China, and looked forward to a peaceful solution to the problem of reunification. When not in meetings, Nixon toured architectural wonders including the Forbidden City, Ming Tombs, and the Great Wall. Americans received their first glimpse into Chinese life through the cameras which accompanied Pat Nixon, who toured the city of Beijing and visited communes, schools, factories, and hospitals. The visit ushered in a new era of SinoAmerican relations. Fearing the possibility of a SinoAmerican alliance, the Soviet Union yielded to pressure for dtente with the United States. Vietnam War Nixon delivers an address to the nation about the Cambodian incursion When Nixon took office, about 300 American soldiers were dying each week in Vietnam, and the war was broadly unpopular in the United States, with violent protests against the war ongoing. The Johnson administration had agreed to suspend bombing in exchange for negotiations without preconditions, but this agreement never fully took force. According to Walter Isaacson, soon after taking office, Nixon had concluded that the Vietnam War could not be won and he was determined to end the war quickly. He sought some arrangement which would permit American forces to withdraw, while leaving South Vietnam secure against attack. Nixon approved a secret B52 carpet bombing campaign of North Vietnamese positions in Cambodia in March 1969 , without the consent of Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk. In mid1969, Nixon began efforts to negotiate peace with the North Vietnamese, sending a personal letter to North Vietnamese leaders, and peace talks began in Paris. Initial talks, however, did not result in an agreement. In May 1969 he publicly proposed to withdraw all American troops from South Vietnam provided North Vietnam also did so and for South Vietnam to hold internationally supervised elections with Viet Cong participation.Address to the Nation on Vietnam May 14, 1969 In July 1969, Nixon visited South Vietnam, where he met with his U.S. military commanders and President Nguyn Vn Thiu. Amid protests at home demanding an immediate pullout, he implemented a strategy of replacing American troops with Vietnamese troops, known as Vietnamization. He soon instituted phased U.S. troop withdrawals but authorized incursions into Laos, in part to interrupt the Ho Chi Minh trail, used to supply North Vietnamese forces, that passed through Laos and Cambodia. Nixon announced the ground invasion of Cambodia to the American public on April 30, 1970. His responses to protesters included an impromptu, early morning meeting with them at the Lincoln Memorial on May 9, 1970. Documents uncovered from the Soviet archives after 1991 reveal that the North Vietnamese attempt to overrun Cambodia in 1970 was launched at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge and negotiated by Pol Pots thensecondincommand, Nuon Chea. Nixons campaign promise to curb the war, contrasted with the escalated bombing, led to claims that Nixon had a credibility gap on the issue. It is estimated that between 50,000 and 150,000 people were killed during the bombing of Cambodia between 1970 and 1973. Kiernan and Owen later revised their estimate of 2.7 million tons of U.S. bombs dropped on Cambodia down to the previously accepted figure of roughly 500,000 tons See In 1971, excerpts from the Pentagon Papers, which had been leaked by Daniel Ellsberg, were published by The New York Times and The Washington Post . When news of the leak first appeared, Nixon was inclined to do nothing the Papers, a history of United States involvement in Vietnam, mostly concerned the lies of prior administrations and contained few real revelations. He was persuaded by Kissinger that the papers were more harmful than they appeared, and the President tried to prevent publication. The Supreme Court eventually ruled for the newspapers. As U.S. troop withdrawals continued, conscription was reduced and in 1973 ended the armed forces became allvolunteer. After years of fighting, the Paris Peace Accords were signed at the beginning of 1973. The agreement implemented a cease fire and allowed for the withdrawal of remaining American troops without requiring the 160,000 North Vietnam Army regulars located in the South to withdraw. Once American combat support ended, there was a brief truce, before fighting broke out again. North Vietnam conquered South Vietnam in 1975. Latin American policy Nixon and Mexican president Gustavo Daz Ordaz riding a presidential motorcade in San Diego, California, September 1970 Nixon had been a firm supporter of Kennedy in the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion and 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis on taking office he stepped up covert operations against Cuba and its president, Fidel Castro. He maintained close relations with the CubanAmerican exile community through his friend, Bebe Rebozo, who often suggested ways of irritating Castro. These activities concerned the Soviets and Cubans, who feared Nixon might attack Cuba and break the understanding between Kennedy and Khrushchev which had ended the missile crisis. In August 1970, the Soviets asked Nixon to reaffirm the understanding despite his hard line against Castro, Nixon agreed. The process had not yet been completed when the Soviets began expanding their base at the Cuban port of Cienfuegos in October 1970. A minor confrontation ensued, which was concluded with an understanding that the Soviets would not use Cienfuegos for submarines bearing ballistic missiles. The final round of diplomatic notes, reaffirming the 1962 accord, were exchanged in November. The election of Marxist candidate Salvador Allende as President of Chile in September 1970 spurred Nixon and Kissinger to pursue a vigorous campaign of covert resistance to Allende, first designed to convince the Chilean congress to confirm Jorge Alessandri as the winner of the election and then messages to military officers in support of a coup. Other support included strikes organized against Allende and funding for Allende opponents. It was even alleged that Nixon personally authorized 700,000 in covert funds to print antiAllende messages in a prominent Chilean newspaper. Following an extended period of social, political, and economic unrest, General Augusto Pinochet assumed power in a violent coup dtat on September 11, 1973 among the dead was Allende. Soviet Union Nixon used the improving international environment to address the topic of nuclear peace. Following the announcement of his visit to China, the Nixon administration concluded negotiations for him to visit the Soviet Union. The President and First Lady arrived in Moscow on May 22, 1972 and met with Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Communist Party Alexei Kosygin, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Nikolai Podgorny, the head of state, among other leading Soviet officials. Nixon meets with Brezhnev during the Soviet leaders trip to the U.S., 1973. Nixon engaged in intense negotiations with Brezhnev. Out of the summit came agreements for increased trade and two landmark arms control treaties SALT I, the first comprehensive limitation pact signed by the two superpowers, and the AntiBallistic Missile Treaty, which banned the development of systems designed to intercept incoming missiles. Nixon and Brezhnev proclaimed a new era of peaceful coexistence. A banquet was held that evening at the Kremlin. Seeking to foster better relations with the United States, both China and the Soviet Union cut back on their diplomatic support for North Vietnam and advised Hanoi to come to terms militarily. Nixon later described his strategy Having made considerable progress over the previous two years in U.S.Soviet relations, Nixon embarked on a second trip to the Soviet Union in 1974. He arrived in Moscow on June 27 to a welcome ceremony, cheering crowds, and a state dinner at the Grand Kremlin Palace that evening. Nixon and Brezhnev met in Yalta, where they discussed a proposed mutual defense pact, dtente, and MIRVs. While he considered proposing a comprehensive testban treaty, Nixon felt he would not have time as president to complete it. There were no significant breakthroughs in these negotiations. Middle Eastern policy Nixon meets with President Anwar Sadat of Egypt, June 1974 As part of the Nixon Doctrine that the U.S. would avoid direct combat assistance to allies where possible, instead giving them assistance to defend themselves, the U.S. greatly increased arms sales to the Middle East particularly Israel, Iran and Saudi Arabia during the Nixon administration. The Nixon administration strongly supported Israel, an American ally in the Middle East, but the support was not unconditional. Nixon believed that Israel should make peace with its Arab neighbors and that the United States should encourage it. The president believed that except during the Suez Crisis the U.S. had failed to intervene with Israel, and should use the leverage of the large U.S. military aid to Israel to urge the parties to the negotiating table. The ArabIsraeli conflict was not a major focus of Nixons attention during his first term for one thing, he felt that no matter what he did, American Jews would oppose his reelection. On October 6, 1973, an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria, supported with arms and materiel by the Soviet Union, attacked Israel in the Yom Kippur War. Israel suffered heavy losses and Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses, cutting through interdepartmental squabbles and bureaucracy and taking personal responsibility for any response by Arab nations. More than a week later, by the time the U.S. and Soviet Union began negotiating a truce, Israel had penetrated deep into enemy territory. The truce negotiations rapidly escalated into a superpower crisis when Israel gained the upper hand, Egyptian President Sadat requested a joint U.S.USSR peacekeeping mission, which the U.S. refused. When Soviet Premier Brezhnev threatened to unilaterally enforce any peacekeeping mission militarily, Nixon ordered the U.S. military to DEFCON3, placing all U.S. military personnel and bases on alert for nuclear war. This was the closest that the world had come to nuclear war since the Cuban Missile Crisis. Brezhnev backed down as a result of Nixons actions. Because Israels victory was largely due to U.S. support, the Arab OPEC nations retaliated by refusing to sell crude oil to the U.S., resulting in the 1973 oil crisis. The embargo caused gasoline shortages and rationing in the United States in late 1973, and was eventually ended by the oilproducing nations as peace in the Middle East took hold. After the war, and under Nixons presidency, the U.S. reestablished relations with Egypt for the first time since 1967. Nixon used the Middle East crisis to restart the stalled Middle East Peace Negotiations he wrote in a confidential memo to Kissinger on October 20 I believe that, beyond a doubt, we are now facing the best opportunity we have had in 15 years to build a lasting peace in the Middle East. I am convinced history will hold us responsible if we let this opportunity slip by... I now consider a permanent Middle East settlement to be the most important final goal to which we must devote ourselves.Tyler, Patrick , p. 161 Nixon made one of his final international visits as president to the Middle East in June 1974, and became the first President to visit Israel. Domestic policy At the Washington Senators 1969 Opening Day at RFK Stadium. To the right of Nixon is team owner Bob Short and then Baseball Commissioner Bowie Kuhn. Marine Corps Aide to the President Jack Brennan sits in uniform behind Nixon. Economy At the time Nixon took office in 1969, inflation was at 4.7percent its highest rate since the Korean War. The Great Society had been enacted under Johnson, which, together with the Vietnam War costs, was causing large budget deficits. Unemployment was low, but interest rates were at their highest in a century. Nixons major economic goal was to reduce inflation the most obvious means of doing so was to end the war. This could not be accomplished overnight, and the U.S. economy continued to struggle through 1970, contributing to a lackluster Republican performance in the midterm congressional elections . According to political economist Nigel Bowles in his 2011 study of Nixons economic record, the new president did little to alter Johnsons policies through the first year of his presidency. Nixon was far more interested in foreign affairs than domestic policies, but believed that voters tend to focus on their own financial condition, and that economic conditions were a threat to his reelection. As part of his New Federalism views, he proposed grants to the states, but these proposals were for the most part lost in the congressional budget process. However, Nixon gained political credit for advocating them. In 1970, Congress had granted the President the power to impose wage and price freezes, though the Democratic majorities, knowing Nixon had opposed such controls through his career, did not expect Nixon to actually use the authority. With inflation unresolved by August 1971, and an election year looming, Nixon convened a summit of his economic advisers at Camp David. He then announced temporary wage and price controls, allowed the dollar to float against other currencies, and ended the convertibility of the dollar into gold. Bowles points out, by identifying himself with a policy whose purpose was inflations defeat, Nixon made it difficult for Democratic opponents... to criticize him. His opponents could offer no alternative policy that was either plausible or believable since the one they favored was one they had designed but which the president had appropriated for himself. Nixons policies dampened inflation through 1972, although their aftereffects contributed to inflation during his second term and into the Ford administration. After Nixon won reelection, inflation was returning. He reimposed price controls in June 1973. The price controls became unpopular with the public and businesspeople, who saw powerful labor unions as preferable to the price board bureaucracy. The controls produced food shortages, as meat disappeared from grocery stores and farmers drowned chickens rather than sell them at a loss. Despite the failure to control inflation, controls were slowly ended, and on April 30, 1974, their statutory authorization lapsed. Governmental initiatives and organization Nixon advocated a New Federalism, which would devolve power to state and local elected officials, though Congress was hostile to these ideas and enacted few of them. He eliminated the Cabinetlevel United States Post Office Department, which in 1971 became the governmentrun United States Postal Service. Nixon was a late convert to the conservation movement. Environmental policy had not been a significant issue in the 1968 election the candidates were rarely asked for their views on the subject. He saw that the first Earth Day in April 1970 presaged a wave of voter interest on the subject, and sought to use that to his benefit in June he announced the formation of the Environmental Protection Agency . Nixon broke new ground by discussing environment policy in his State of the Union speech other initiatives supported by Nixon included the Clean Air Act of 1970 and Occupational Safety and Health Administration the National Environmental Policy Act required environmental impact statements for many Federal projects. Nixon vetoed the Clean Water Act of 1972 objecting not to the policy goals of the legislation but to the amount of money to be spent on them, which he deemed excessive. After Congress overrode his veto, Nixon impounded the funds he deemed unjustifiable. In 1971, Nixon proposed health insurance reform a private health insurance employer mandate, federalization of Medicaid for poor families with dependent minor children, and support for health maintenance organizations . A limited HMO bill was enacted in 1973. In 1974, Nixon proposed more comprehensive health insurance reform a private health insurance employer mandate and replacement of Medicaid by staterun health insurance plans available to all, with incomebased premiums and cost sharing. Concerned about the prevalence of drug use both domestically and among American soldiers in Vietnam, Nixon called for a War on Drugs, pledging to cut off sources of supply abroad, and to increase funds for education and for rehabilitation facilities. As one policy initiative, Nixon called for more money for sicklecell research, treatment, and education in February 1971 and signed the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act on May 16, 1972. While Nixon called for increased spending on such highprofile items as sicklecell disease and for a War on Cancer, at the same time he sought to reduce overall spending at the National Institutes of Health. Civil rights The Nixon presidency witnessed the first largescale integration of public schools in the South. Nixon sought a middle way between the segregationist Wallace and liberal Democrats, whose support of integration was alienating some Southern whites. Hopeful of doing well in the South in 1972, he sought to dispose of desegregation as a political issue before then. Soon after his inauguration, he appointed Vice President Agnew to lead a task force, which worked with local leaders both white and black to determine how to integrate local schools. Agnew had little interest in the work, and most of it was done by Labor Secretary George Shultz. Federal aid was available, and a meeting with President Nixon was a possible reward for compliant committees. By September 1970, less than ten percent of black children were attending segregated schools. By 1971, however, tensions over desegregation surfaced in Northern cities, with angry protests over the busing of children to schools outside their neighborhood to achieve racial balance. Nixon opposed busing personally but enforced court orders requiring its use. In addition to desegregating public schools, Nixon implemented the Philadelphia Plan in 1970 the first significant federal affirmative action program. He also endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment after it passed both houses of Congress in 1972 and went to the states for ratification. Nixon had campaigned as an ERA supporter in 1968, though feminists criticized him for doing little to help the ERA or their cause after his election. Nevertheless, he appointed more women to administration positions than Lyndon Johnson had. Space policy Nixon visits the Apollo 11 astronauts in quarantine aboard USS Hornet . After a nearly decadelong national effort, the United States won the race to land astronauts on the Moon on July 20, 1969, with the flight of Apollo 11. Nixon spoke with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin during their moonwalk. He called the conversation the most historic phone call ever made from the White House. Nixon was unwilling to keep funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration at the high level seen during the 1960s as NASA prepared to send men to the Moon. NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine drew up ambitious plans for the establishment of a permanent base on the Moon by the end of the 1970s and the launch of a manned expedition to Mars as early as 1981. Nixon rejected both proposals due to the expense. Nixon also canceled the Air Force Manned Orbital Laboratory program in 1969, because unmanned spy satellites were a more costeffective way to achieve the same reconnaissance objective. On March 7, 1970, Nixon announced the end of the KennedyJohnson eras massive efforts in the space race, stating We must think of activities as part of a continuing process ... and not as a series of separate leaps, each requiring a massive concentration of energy. ... We must also realize that space expenditures must take their proper place within a rigorous system of national priorities. What we do in space from here on in must become a normal and regular part of our national life and must therefore be planned in conjunction with all of the other undertakings which are also important to us. He then cancelled the last three planned Apollo lunar missions to place Skylab in orbit more efficiently and free money up for the design and construction of the Space Shuttle. On May 24, 1972, Nixon approved a fiveyear cooperative program between NASA and the Soviet space program, culminating in the 1975 joint mission of an American Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft linking in space. Reelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation Nixon announces the release of edited transcripts of the Watergate tapes, April 29, 1974. 1972 presidential campaign 1972 electoral vote results Nixon believed his rise to power had peaked at a moment of political realignment. The Democratic Solid South had long been a source of frustration to Republican ambitions. Goldwater had won several Southern states by opposing the Civil Rights Act of 1964 but had alienated more moderate Southerners. Nixons efforts to gain Southern support in 1968 were diluted by Wallaces candidacy. Through his first term, he pursued a Southern Strategy with policies, such as his desegregation plans, that would be broadly acceptable among Southern whites, encouraging them to realign with the Republicans in the aftermath of the Civil Rights Movement. He nominated two Southern conservatives, Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell to the Supreme Court, but neither was confirmed by the Senate. Nixon meets the public during the 1972 presidential campaign. Nixon entered his name on the New Hampshire primary ballot on January 5, 1972, effectively announcing his candidacy for reelection. Virtually assured the Republican nomination, the President had initially expected his Democratic opponent to be Massachusetts Senator Ted Kennedy , but he was largely removed from contention after the 1969 Chappaquiddick incident. Instead, Maine Senator Edmund Muskie became the front runner, with South Dakota Senator George McGovern in a close second place. On June 10, McGovern won the California primary and secured the Democratic nomination. The following month, Nixon was renominated at the 1972 Republican National Convention. He dismissed the Democratic platform as cowardly and divisive. McGovern intended to sharply reduce defense spending and supported amnesty for draft evaders as well as abortion rights. With some of his supporters believed to be in favor of drug legalization, McGovern was perceived as standing for amnesty, abortion and acid. McGovern was also damaged by his vacillating support for his original running mate, Missouri Senator Thomas Eagleton, dumped from the ticket following revelations that he had received treatment for depression. Nixon was ahead in most polls for the entire election cycle, and was reelected on November 7, 1972 in one of the largest landslide election victories in American history. He defeated McGovern with over 60percent of the popular vote, losing only in Massachusetts and the District of Columbia. Watergate Nixon fields questions at a press conference, October 26, 1973. The term Watergate has come to encompass an array of clandestine and often illegal activities undertaken by members of the Nixon administration. Those activities included dirty tricks, or bugging the offices of political opponents and the harassment of activist groups and political figures. The activities were brought to light after five men were caught breaking into Democratic party headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington, D.C. on June 17, 1972. The Washington Post picked up on the story reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward relied on an informant known as Deep Throat later revealed to be Mark Felt, associate director at the FBI to link the men to the Nixon administration. Nixon downplayed the scandal as mere politics, calling news articles biased and misleading. A series of revelations made it clear that the Committee to Reelect President Nixon, and later the White House, was involved in attempts to sabotage the Democrats. Senior aides such as White House Counsel John Dean faced prosecution in total 48 officials were convicted of wrongdoing. In July 1973, White House aide Alexander Butterfield testified under oath to Congress that Nixon had a secret taping system that recorded his conversations and phone calls in the Oval Office. These tapes were subpoenaed by Watergate Special Counsel Archibald Cox Nixon provided transcripts of the conversations but not the actual tapes, citing executive privilege. With the White House and Cox at loggerheads, Nixon had Cox fired in October in the Saturday Night Massacre he was replaced by Leon Jaworski. In November, Nixons lawyers revealed that an audio tape of conversations held in the White House on June 20, 1972 featured an 18 minute gap. Rose Mary Woods, the Presidents personal secretary, claimed responsibility for the gap, alleging that she had accidentally wiped the section while transcribing the tape, though her tale was widely mocked. The gap, while not conclusive proof of wrongdoing by the President, cast doubt on Nixons statement that he had been unaware of the coverup. A demonstrator demands Nixons impeachment, October 1973. Though Nixon lost much popular support, even from his own party, he rejected accusations of wrongdoing and vowed to stay in office. He insisted that he had made mistakes, but had no prior knowledge of the burglary, did not break any laws, and did not learn of the coverup until early 1973. On October 10, 1973, Vice President Agnew resigned unrelated to Watergate and was convicted on charges of bribery, tax evasion and money laundering during his tenure as Governor of Maryland. Nixon chose Gerald Ford, Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, to replace Agnew. One researcher suggested Nixon effectively disengaged from his own administration after the swearing in of Gerald Ford as Vice President on December 6, 1973. On November 17, 1973, during a televised question and answer session with the press, Nixon said, People have got to know whether or not their President is a crook. Well, Im not a crook. Ive earned everything Ive got. The legal battle over the tapes continued through early 1974, and in April 1974 Nixon announced the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between him and his aides. The House Judiciary Committee opened impeachment hearings against the President on May 9, 1974, which were televised on the major TV networks. These hearings culminated in votes for impeachment. On July 24, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the full tapes, not just selected transcripts, must be released. The scandal grew to involve a slew of additional allegations against the President, ranging from the improper use of government agencies to accepting gifts in office and his personal finances and taxes Nixon repeatedly stated his willingness to pay any outstanding taxes due, and paid 465,000 in back taxes in 1974. Nixon Oval Office meeting with H.R. Haldeman Smoking Gun Conversation June 23, 1972 Full Transcript Even with support diminished by the continuing series of revelations, Nixon hoped to fight the charges. However, one of the new tapes, recorded soon after the breakin, demonstrated that Nixon had been told of the White House connection to the Watergate burglaries soon after they took place, and had approved plans to thwart the investigation. In a statement accompanying the release of what became known as the Smoking Gun Tape on August 5, 1974, Nixon accepted blame for misleading the country about when he had been told of White House involvement, stating that he had a lapse of memory. Senate Minority Leader Hugh Scott, Senator Barry Goldwater, and House Minority Leader John Jacob Rhodes met with Nixon soon after. Rhodes told Nixon that he faced certain impeachment in the House. Scott and Goldwater told the president that he had, at most, only 15 votes in his favor in the Senate far fewer than the 34 he needed to avoid removal from office. Resignation In light of his loss of political support and the nearcertainty that he would be impeached and removed, Nixon resigned the presidency on August 9, 1974, after addressing the nation on television the previous evening. Nixon chose to resign after realizing public opinion was not in his favor to remain in office. The resignation speech was delivered from the Oval Office and was carried live on radio and television. Nixon stated that he was resigning for the good of the country and asked the nation to support the new president, Gerald Ford. Nixon went on to review the accomplishments of his presidency, especially in foreign policy. He defended his record as president, quoting from Theodore Roosevelts 1910 speech Citizenship in a Republic Nixons speech received generally favorable initial responses from network commentators, with only Roger Mudd of CBS stating that Nixon had not admitted wrongdoing. It was termed a masterpiece by Conrad Black, one of his biographers. Black opined that What was intended to be an unprecedented humiliation for any American president, Nixon converted into a virtual parliamentary acknowledgement of almost blameless insufficiency of legislative support to continue. He left while devoting half his address to a recitation of his accomplishments in office. Later years and death President Ronald Reagan meets with his three predecessors, Ford, Carter and Nixon at the White House, October 1981 the three former presidents represented the United States at the funeral of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat. Pardon and illness President Ford announces his decision to pardon Nixon, September 8, 1974, in the Oval Office. Following his resignation, the Nixons flew to their home La Casa Pacifica in San Clemente, California. According to his biographer, Aitken, after his resignation, Nixon was a soul in torment. Congress had funded Nixons transition costs, including some salary expenses, though reducing the appropriation from 850,000 to 200,000. With some of his staff still with him, Nixon was at his desk by 7a.m. with little to do. His former press secretary, Ron Ziegler, sat with him alone for hours each day. Nixons resignation had not put an end to the desire among many to see him punished. The Ford White House considered a pardon of Nixon, though it would be unpopular in the country. Nixon, contacted by Ford emissaries, was initially reluctant to accept the pardon, but then agreed to do so. Ford insisted on a statement of contrition, but Nixon felt he had not committed any crimes and should not have to issue such a document. Ford eventually agreed, and on September 8, 1974, he granted Nixon a full, free, and absolute pardon, which ended any possibility of an indictment. Nixon then released a statement In October 1974, Nixon fell ill with phlebitis, the inflammation of the walls of a vein. Told by his doctors that he could either be operated on or die, a reluctant Nixon chose surgery, and President Ford visited him in the hospital. Nixon was under subpoena for the trial of three of his former aides Dean, Haldeman, and John Ehrlichman and The Washington Post , disbelieving his illness, printed a cartoon showing Nixon with a cast on the wrong foot. Judge John Sirica excused Nixons presence despite the defendants objections. Congress instructed Ford to retain Nixons presidential papers beginning a threedecade legal battle over the documents that was eventually won by the former president and his estate. Nixon was in the hospital when the 1974 midterm elections were held, and Watergate and the pardon were contributing factors to the Republican loss of 43seats in the House and three in the Senate. Return to public life In December 1974, Nixon began planning his comeback despite the considerable illwill against him in the country. He wrote in his diary, referring to himself and Pat, Nixon joins Gerald Ford and President Jimmy Carter at the White House for the funeral of former Vice President Hubert Humphrey, 1978. By early 1975, Nixons health was improving. He maintained an office in a Coast Guard station 300 yards from his home, at first taking a golf cart and later walking the route each day he mainly worked on his memoirs. He had hoped to wait before writing his memoirs the fact that his assets were being eaten away by expenses and lawyer fees compelled him to begin work quickly. He was handicapped in this work by the end of his transition allowance in February, which compelled him to part with many of his staff, including Ziegler. In August of that year, he met with British talkshow host and producer David Frost, who paid him 600,000 for a series of sitdown interviews, filmed and aired in 1977. They began on the topic of foreign policy, recounting the leaders he had known, but the most remembered section of the interviews was that on Watergate. Nixon admitted that he had let down the country and that I brought myself down. I gave them a sword and they stuck it in. And they twisted it with relish. And, I guess, if Id been in their position, Id have done the same thing. The interviews garnered 45 50million viewers becoming the mostwatched program of their kind in television history. The interviews helped improve Nixons financial position at one point in early 1975 he had only 500 in the bank as did the sale of his Key Biscayne property to a trust set up by wealthy Nixon friends such as Bebe Rebozo. In February 1976, Nixon visited China at the personal invitation of Mao. Nixon had wanted to return to China, but chose to wait until after Fords own visit in 1975. Nixon remained neutral in the close 1976 primary battle between Ford and Reagan. Ford won, but was defeated by Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter in the general election. The Carter administration had little use for Nixon and blocked his planned trip to Australia, causing the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser to withhold its official invitation. In 1976, Nixon was disbarred by the New York State Bar Association for obstruction of justice in the Watergate affair. Nixon chose not to present any defense.Nixon disbarred in New York in 1st ruling of Watergate guilt, Toledo Blade, July 9, 1976 p.1 In early 1978, Nixon went to the United Kingdom. He was shunned by American diplomats and by most ministers of the James Callaghan government. He was welcomed, however, by the Leader of the Opposition, Margaret Thatcher, as well as by former prime ministers Lord Home and Sir Harold Wilson. Two other former prime ministers, Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath declined to meet him. Nixon addressed the Oxford Union regarding Watergate Author and elder statesman Nixon speaks with Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping and U.S. President Jimmy Carter at the White House, 1979. In 1978, Nixon published his memoirs, RN The Memoirs of Richard Nixon , the first of ten books he was to author in his retirement. The book was a bestseller and attracted a generally positive critical response. Nixon visited the White House in 1979, invited by Carter for the state dinner for Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. Carter had not wanted to invite Nixon, but Deng had stated he would visit Nixon in California if the former president was not invited. Nixon had a private meeting with Deng and visited Beijing again in mid1979. On August 10, 1979, the Nixons purchased a New York City townhouse at 817 Fifth Avenue after being rejected by two Manhattan coops. When the former Shah of Iran died in Egypt in July 1980, Nixon defied the State Department, which intended to send no U.S. representative, by attending the funeral. Though Nixon had no official credentials, as a former president he was seen as the American presence at its former allys funeral. Nixon supported Ronald Reagan for president in 1980, making television appearances portraying himself as, in biographer Stephen Ambroses words, the senior statesman above the fray. He wrote guest articles for many publications both during the campaign and after Reagans victory. After eighteen months in the New York City townhouse, Nixon and his wife moved in 1981 to Saddle River, New Jersey. Nixon in 1992 Throughout the 1980s, Nixon maintained an ambitious schedule of speaking engagements and writing, traveled, and met with many foreign leaders, especially those of Third World countries. He joined former Presidents Ford and Carter as representatives of the United States at the funeral of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat. On a trip to the Middle East, Nixon made his views known regarding Saudi Arabia and Libya, which attracted significant U.S. media attention The Washington Post ran stories on Nixons rehabilitation. Nixon visited the Soviet Union in 1986 and on his return sent President Reagan a lengthy memorandum containing foreign policy suggestions and his personal impressions of Mikhail Gorbachev. Following this trip, Nixon was ranked in a Gallup poll as one of the ten most admired men in the world. Nixon visits President Bill Clinton in the White House family quarters, March 1993. In 1986, Nixon addressed a convention of newspaper publishers, impressing his audience with his tour dhorizon of the world. At the time, political pundit Elizabeth Drew wrote, Even when he was wrong, Nixon still showed that he knew a great deal and had a capacious memory, as well as the capacity to speak with apparent authority, enough to impress people who had little regard for him in earlier times. Newsweek ran a story on Nixons comeback with the headline Hes back. On July 19, 1990, the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, California opened as a private institution with the Nixons in attendance. They were joined by a large crowd of people, including Presidents Ford, Reagan, and George H. W. Bush, as well as their wives, Betty, Nancy, and Barbara. In January 1991, the former president founded the Nixon Center , a Washington policy think tank and conference center. Pat Nixon died on June 22, 1993, of emphysema and lung cancer. Her funeral services were held on the grounds of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace. Former President Nixon was distraught throughout the interment and delivered a tribute to her inside the library building. Death and funeral Nixon suffered a severe stroke on April 18, 1994, while preparing to eat dinner in his Park Ridge, New Jersey home. A blood clot resulting from the atrial fibrillation he had suffered for many years had formed in his upper heart, broken off, and traveled to his brain. He was taken to New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, initially alert but unable to speak or to move his right arm or leg. Damage to the brain caused swelling , and Nixon slipped into a deep coma. He died at 908p.m. on April 22, 1994, with his daughters at his bedside. He was 81 years old. Five U.S. presidents and their wives attend the funeral of Richard Nixon, April 27, 1994. Nixons funeral took place on April 27, 1994, in Yorba Linda, California. Eulogists at the Nixon Library ceremony included President Bill Clinton, former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, California Governor Pete Wilson, and the Reverend Billy Graham. Also in attendance were former Presidents Ford, Carter, Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and their wives. Richard Nixon was buried beside his wife Pat on the grounds of the Nixon Library. He was survived by his two daughters, Tricia and Julie, and four grandchildren. In keeping with his wishes, his funeral was not a full state funeral, though his body did lie in repose in the Nixon Library lobby from April 26 to the morning of the funeral service. Mourners waited in line for up to eight hours in chilly, wet weather to pay their respects. At its peak, the line to pass by Nixons casket was three miles long with an estimated 42,000 people waiting. John F. Stacks of Time magazine said of Nixon shortly after his death, An outsize energy and determination drove him on to recover and rebuild after every selfcreated disaster that he faced. To reclaim a respected place in American public life after his resignation, he kept traveling and thinking and talking to the worlds leaders... and by the time Bill Clinton came to the White House in 1993, Nixon had virtually cemented his role as an elder statesman. Clinton, whose wife served on the staff of the committee that voted to impeach Nixon, met openly with him and regularly sought his advice. Tom Wicker of The New York Times noted that Nixon had been equalled only by Franklin Roosevelt in being five times nominated on a major party ticket and, quoting Nixons 1962 farewell speech, wrote, Richard Nixons jowly, beardshadowed face, the skijump nose and the widows peak, the arms upstretched in the Vsign, had been so often pictured and caricatured, his presence had become such a familiar one in the land, he had been so often in the heat of controversy, that it was hard to realize the nation really would not have Nixon to kick around anymore. Ambrose said of the reaction to Nixons death, To everyones amazement, except his, hes our beloved elder statesman. Upon Nixons death, almost all of the news coverage mentioned Watergate, but for the most part, the coverage was favorable to the former president. The Dallas Morning News stated, History ultimately should show that despite his flaws, he was one of our most farsighted chief executives. This offended some columnist Russell Baker complained of a group conspiracy to grant him absolution. Cartoonist Jeff Koterba of the Omaha WorldHerald depicted History before a blank canvas, his subject Nixon, as America looks on eagerly. The artist urges his audience to sit down the work will take some time to complete, as this portrait is a little more complicated than most. Hunter S. Thompson wrote a scathing piece denouncing Nixon for Rolling Stone , entitled He Was a Crook . In his article, Thompson described Nixon as a political monster straight out of Grendel and a very dangerous enemy. Legacy Historian and political scientist James MacGregor Burns observed of Nixon, How can one evaluate such an idiosyncratic president, so brilliant and so morally lacking Nixons biographers disagree on how he will be perceived by history. According to Ambrose, Nixon wanted to be judged by what he accomplished. What he will be remembered for is the nightmare he put the country through in his second term and for his resignation. Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixons congressional career, suggests that he was remarkable among his congressional peers, a success story in a troubled era, one who steered a sensible antiCommunist course against the excess of McCarthy. Aitken feels that Nixon, both as a man and as a statesman, has been excessively maligned for his faults and inadequately recognised for his virtues. Yet even in a spirit of historical revisionism, no simple verdict is possible. The graves of President Richard Nixon and First Lady Pat Nixon Nixons Southern Strategy is credited by some historians as causing the South to become a Republican stronghold, though others deem economic factors more important to the change. Throughout his career, he was instrumental in moving his party away from the control of isolationists, and as a congressman was a persuasive advocate of containing Soviet communism. According to his biographer, Herbert Parmet, Nixons role was to steer the Republican party along a middle course, somewhere between the competitive impulses of the Rockefellers, the Goldwaters, and the Reagans. Nixon is given credit for his stance on domestic affairs, which resulted in the passage and enforcement of environmental and regulatory legislation. Historian Paul Charles Milazzo in his 2011 paper on Nixon and the environment, points to Nixons creation of the EPA and his enforcement of legislation such as the 1973 Endangered Species Act, stating that though unsought and unacknowledged, Richard Nixons environmental legacy is secure. Nixon saw his policies regarding Vietnam, China, and the Soviets as key to his place in history. George McGovern, Nixons onetime opponent, commented in 1983, President Nixon probably had a more practical approach to the two superpowers, China and the Soviet Union, than any other president since World War II... With the exception of his inexcusable continuation of the war in Vietnam, Nixon really will get high marks in history. Political scientist Jussi Hanhimki disagrees, saying Nixons diplomacy was merely a continuation of the Cold War policy of containment, using diplomatic rather than military means. Historian Christopher Andrew concludes that Nixon was a great statesman on the world stage as well as a shabby practitioner of electoral politics in the domestic arena. While the criminal farce of Watergate was in the making, Nixons inspirational statesmanship was establishing new working relationships with both Communist China and the Soviet Union. Historian Keith W. Olson has written that Nixon left a negative legacy fundamental mistrust of government with its roots in Vietnam and Watergate. During the impeachment of Bill Clinton in 1998, both sides tried to use Nixon and Watergate to their advantage Republicans suggested that Clintons misconduct had been comparable to Nixons, while Democrats contended that Nixons actions had been far more serious than those of the incumbent. Another legacy, for a time, was a decrease in the power of the presidency as Congress passed restrictive legislation in the wake of Watergate. Olson suggests that grants of power to George W. Bush in the aftermath of the 911 attacks restored the presidents power. Personality and public image Nixon and Elvis Presley in December 1970 The President The King Nixons career was frequently dogged by his persona and the publics perception of it. Editorial cartoonists and comedians often exaggerated his appearance and mannerisms, to the point where the line between the human and the caricature became increasingly blurred. He was often portrayed with unshaven jowls, slumped shoulders, and a furrowed, sweaty brow. Nixon had a complex personality, both very secretive and awkward, yet strikingly reflective about himself. He was inclined to distance himself from people and was formal in all aspects, wearing a coat and tie even when home alone. Nixon biographer Conrad Black described him as being driven though also uneasy with himself in some ways. According to Black, Nixon thought that he was doomed to be traduced, doublecrossed, unjustly harassed, misunderstood, underappreciated, and subjected to the trials of Job, but that by the application of his mighty will, tenacity, and diligence, he would ultimately prevail. Biographer Elizabeth Drew summarized Nixon as a smart, talented man, but most peculiar and haunted of presidents. In his account of the Nixon presidency, author Richard Reeves described Nixon as a strange man of uncomfortable shyness, who functioned best alone with his thoughts. Nixons presidency was doomed by his personality, Reeves argues He assumed the worst in people and he brought out the worst in them... He clung to the idea of being tough. He thought that was what had brought him to the edge of greatness. But that was what betrayed him. He could not open himself to other men and he could not open himself to greatness. Nixon with Bebe Rebozo and FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover. The three men relax before dinner, Key Biscayne, Florida, December 1971. Nixon believed that putting distance between himself and other people was necessary for him as he advanced in his political career and became president. Even Bebe Rebozo, by some accounts his closest friend, did not call him by his first name. Nixon stated of this, Even with close friends, I dont believe in letting your hair down, confiding this and that and the other thing saying, Gee, I couldnt sleep... I believe you should keep your troubles to yourself. Thats just the way I am. Some people are different. Some people think its good therapy to sit with a close friend and, you know, just spill your guts... and reveal their inner psyche whether they were breastfed or bottlefed. Not me. No way. When told that most Americans, even at the end of his career, did not feel they knew him, Nixon replied, Yeah, its true. And its not necessary for them to know. See also Murray Chotiner, Nixons campaign manager and aide Notes Explanatory notes Citations References Bibliography Malsberger, John W. The General and the Politician Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and American Politics Originally published Garden City, N.Y. Doubleday, 1975 Emphasis on historiography Nixon Library Other sources Further reading Farrell, John A Richard Nixon The Life New York Doubleday External links Official websites White House biography Nixon Presidential Library and Museum Richard Nixon Foundation Media coverage Life Portrait of Richard M. Nixon, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , November 19, 1999 Other Essays on Richard Nixon, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Richard Nixon A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress The Presidents Nixon, an American Experience documentary Richard Nixon Personal Manuscripts Category1913 births Category1994 deaths Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury American writers Category20thcentury Quakers CategoryAmerican anticommunists CategoryAmerican lawyers CategoryAmerican memoirists CategoryAmerican military personnel of World War II CategoryAmerican military personnel who served in the Pacific theatre of World War II CategoryAmerican people of the Vietnam War CategoryAmerican Quakers CategoryBurials in Orange County, California CategoryCalifornia lawyers CategoryMilitary personnel from California CategoryCalifornia Republicans CategoryDuke University School of Law alumni CategoryEisenhower administration cabinet members CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from California CategoryPeople from Saddle River, New Jersey CategoryPeople from San Clemente, California CategoryPeople from Whittier, California CategoryPeople from Yorba Linda, California CategoryPeople of the Laotian Civil War CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRecipients of American presidential pardons CategoryRepublican Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party United States Senators CategoryRepublican Party vice presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategoryUnited States Navy officers CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1960 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1968 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1972 CategoryUnited States Senators from California CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1952 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1956 CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryWhittier Poets football players CategoryLawyers disbarred in the Watergate scandal CategoryNixon administration personnel involved in the Watergate scandal CategoryAmerican people of German descent CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of Irish descent CategoryAmerican people of Scottish descent CategoryAmerican people of Dutchdescent
Thomas Jefferson was an American statesman, one of the Founding Fathers of the United States and the principal author of the Declaration of Independence. He later served as the third President of the United States from 1801 to 1809. Previously, he was elected the second Vice President of the United States, serving under John Adams from 1797 to 1801. A proponent of democracy, republicanism, and individual rights motivating American colonists to break from Great Britain and form a new nation, he produced formative documents and decisions at both the state and national level. He was a land owner and farmer. Jefferson was primarily of English ancestry, born and educated in colonial Virginia. He graduated from the College of William Mary and briefly practiced law, at times defending slaves seeking their freedom. During the American Revolution, he represented Virginia in the Continental Congress that adopted the Declaration, drafted the law for religious freedom as a Virginia legislator, and he served as a wartime governor . He became the United States Minister to France in May 1785, and subsequently the nations first Secretary of State in 1790 1793 under President George Washington. Jefferson and James Madison organized the DemocraticRepublican Party to oppose the Federalist Party during the formation of the First Party System. With Madison, he anonymously wrote the controversial Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions in 1798 1799, which sought to embolden states rights in opposition to the national government by nullifying the Alien and Sedition Acts. As President, Jefferson pursued the nations shipping and trade interests against Barbary pirates and aggressive British trade policies. He also organized the Louisiana Purchase, almost doubling the countrys territory. As a result of peace negotiations with France, his administration reduced military forces. He was reelected in 1804. Jeffersons second term was beset with difficulties at home, including the trial of former Vice President Aaron Burr. American foreign trade was diminished when Jefferson implemented the Embargo Act of 1807, responding to British threats to U.S. shipping. In 1803, Jefferson began a controversial process of Indian tribe removal to the newly organized Louisiana Territory, and he signed the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves in 1807. Jefferson mastered many disciplines, which ranged from surveying and mathematics to horticulture and mechanics. He was a proven architect in the classical tradition. Jeffersons keen interest in religion and philosophy earned him the presidency of the American Philosophical Society. He shunned organized religion, but was influenced by both Christianity and deism. He was well versed in linguistics and spoke several languages. He founded the University of Virginia after retiring from public office. He was a prolific letter writer and corresponded with many prominent and important people throughout his adult life. His only fulllength book is Notes on the State of Virginia , considered among the most important American books published before 1800. Jefferson owned several plantations which were worked by hundreds of slaves. After the death of his wife Martha in 1782, he had a relationship with his slave Sally Hemings and fathered at least one of her children. Historians have lauded Jeffersons public life, noting his primary authorship of the Declaration of Independence during the Revolutionary War, his advocacy of religious freedom and tolerance in Virginia, and the Louisiana Purchase while he was president. Various modern scholars are more critical of Jeffersons private life, often pointing out the discrepancy between his ownership of slaves and his liberal political principles. Presidential scholars consistently rank Jefferson among the greatest presidents. Early life and career Thomas Jefferson was born on April 13, 1743 , at the family home in Shadwell in the Colony of Virginia, the third of ten children.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 18. He was of English and possibly Welsh descent and was born a British subject.Malone, 1948, pp. 5 6. His father Peter Jefferson was a planter and surveyor who died when Jefferson was fourteen his mother was Jane Randolph. Peter Jefferson moved his family to Tuckahoe Plantation in 1745 upon the death of William Randolph, the plantations owner and Jeffersons friend, who in his will had named him guardian of his children. The Jeffersons returned to Shadwell in 1752, where Peter died in 1757 his estate was divided between his sons Thomas and Randolph.Malone, 1948, pp. 31 33. Thomas inherited approximately of land, including Monticello. He assumed full authority over his property at age 21.Malone, 1948, pp. 437 40. Education Wren Building , College of William Mary where Jefferson studied Jefferson began his childhood education beside the Randolph children with tutors at Tuckahoe.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 19. In 1752, he began attending a local school run by a Scottish Presbyterian minister. At age nine, he started studying the natural world as well as three languages Latin, Greek, and French. By this time he also learned to ride horses. He was taught from 1758 to 1760 by Reverend James Maury near Gordonsville, Virginia, where he studied history, science, and the classics while boarding with Maurys family.Peterson, 1970, pp. 7 9. Jefferson entered the College of William Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, at age 16 and studied mathematics, metaphysics, and philosophy under Professor William Small. Small introduced him to the British Empiricists including John Locke, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton. Jefferson improved his French and Greek and his skill at the violin. He graduated two years after starting in 1762. He read the law under Professor George Wythes tutelage to obtain his law license, while working as a law clerk in Wythes office.Meacham, 2012, pp. 29, 39. He also read a wide variety of English classics and political works.Meacham, 2012, pp. 19, 28 29. Jefferson treasured his books. In 1770, his Shadwell home was destroyed by fire, including a library of 200 volumes inherited from his father.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 42. Nevertheless, he had replenished his library with 1,250 titles by 1773, and his collection grew to almost 6,500 volumes in 1814.Ferling, 2000, p. 43. The British burned the Library of Congress that year he then sold more than 6,000 books to the Library for 23,950. He had intended to pay off some of his large debt, but he resumed collecting for his personal library, writing to John Adams, I cannot live without books.Library of Congress Lawyer and House of Burgesses House of Burgesses in Williamsburg, Virginia, where Jefferson served 1769 1775 Jefferson was admitted to the Virginia bar in 1767 and then lived with his mother at Shadwell.Meacham, 2012, pp. 11, 49. In addition to practicing law, Jefferson represented Albemarle County as a delegate in the Virginia House of Burgesses from 1769 until 1775.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 40. He pursued reforms to slavery. He introduced legislation in 1769 allowing masters to take control over the emancipation of slaves, taking discretion away from the royal Governor and General Court. He persuaded his cousin Richard Bland to spearhead the legislations passage, but reaction was strongly negative.Meacham, 2012, pp. 47 49. Jefferson took seven cases for freedomseeking slavesGordonReed, 2008, p. 348. and waived his fee for one client, who claimed that he should be freed before the statutory age of thirtyone required for emancipation in cases with interracial grandparents.GordonReed, 2008, pp. 99 100. He invoked Natural Law to argue, everyone comes into the world with a right to his own person and using it at his own will... This is what is called personal liberty, and is given him by the author of nature, because it is necessary for his own sustenance. The judge cut him off and ruled against his client. As a consolation, Jefferson gave his client some money, conceivably used to aid his escape shortly thereafter. He later incorporated this sentiment into the Declaration of Independence.Meacham, 2012, p. 49. He also took on 68 cases for the General Court of Virginia in 1767, in addition to three notable cases Howell v. Netherland , Bolling v. Bolling , and Blair v. Blair .Konig, David T., Encyclopedia Virginia The British Parliament passed the Intolerable Acts in 1774, and Jefferson wrote a resolution calling for a Day of Fasting and Prayer in protest, as well as a boycott of all British goods. His resolution was later expanded into A Summary View of the Rights of British America , in which he argued that people have the right to govern themselves.Meacham, 2012, pp. 71 73. Monticello, marriage and family Jeffersons home Monticello In 1768, Jefferson began constructing his primary residence Monticello on a hilltop overlooking his 5,000acre plantation. Construction was done mostly by local masons and carpenters, assisted by Jeffersons slaves.TJF Monticello FAQ Who built the house He moved into the South Pavilion in 1770. Turning Monticello into a neoclassical masterpiece in the Palladian style was his perennial project.Ellis, 1996, pp. 142 44. On January 1, 1772, Jefferson married his third cousin Martha Wayles Skelton, the 23yearold widow of Bathurst Skelton, and she moved into the South Pavilion.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 47.Roberts, 1993 She was a frequent hostess for Jefferson and managed the large household. Biographer Dumas Malone described the marriage as the happiest period of Jeffersons life.Malone, 1948, p. 53. Martha read widely, did fine needlework, and was a skilled pianist Jefferson often accompanied her on the violin or cello.Malone, 1948, pp. 47, 158. During their ten years of marriage, Martha bore six children Martha Patsy Jane a son who lived for only a few weeks in 1777 Mary Wayles Polly Lucy Elizabeth and another Lucy Elizabeth . Only Martha and Mary survived more than a few years.White House Archives Jeffersons daughter Martha Marthas father John Wayles died in 1773, and the couple inherited 135 slaves, , and the estates debts. The debts took Jefferson years to satisfy, contributing to his financial problems. Martha later suffered from ill health, including diabetes, and frequent childbirth further weakened her. Her mother had died young, and Martha lived with two stepmothers as a girl. A few months after the birth of her last child, she died on September 6, 1782, at the age of 33 with Jefferson at her bedside. Shortly before her death, Martha made Jefferson promise never to marry again, telling him that she could not bear to have another mother raise her children.GordonReed, 2008, p. 145 Meacham, 2012, p. 53. Jefferson was griefstricken by her death, relentlessly pacing back and forth, nearly to the point of exhaustion. He emerged after three weeks, taking long rambling rides on secluded roads with his daughter Martha, by her description a solitary witness to many a violent burst of grief.Halliday, 2009, pp. 48 53. After working as Secretary of State , he returned to Monticello and initiated a remodeling based on the architectural concepts which he had acquired in Europe. The work continued throughout most of his presidency, being finished in 1809.TJFMonticello ConstructionBernstein, 2003, p. 109. Political career 1775 1800 Declaration of Independence U.S. Declaration of Independence 1823 facsimile of the engrossed copy Jefferson was the primary author of the Declaration of Independence. At age 33, he was one of the youngest delegates to the Second Continental Congress beginning in 1775 at the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War, where a formal declaration of independence from Britain was overwhelmingly favored.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 77. Jefferson chose his words for the Declaration in June 1775, shortly after the war had begun, where the idea of Independence from Britain had long since become popular among the colonies. He was inspired by the Enlightenment ideals of the sanctity of the individual, as well as by the writings of Locke and Montesquieu.Meacham, 2012, pp. 103 04. He sought out John Adams, an emerging leader of the Congress.Peterson, 1970, p. 87. They became close friends and Adams supported Jeffersons appointment to the Committee of Five formed to draft a declaration of independence in furtherance of the Lee Resolution passed by the Congress, which declared the United Colonies independent. The committee initially thought that Adams should write the document, but Adams persuaded the committee to choose Jefferson. Jefferson consulted with other committee members over the next seventeen days, and drew on his own proposed draft of the Virginia Constitution, George Masons draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights, and other sources.Maier, 1997, p. 104. The other committee members made some changes, and a final draft was presented to the Congress on June 28, 1776.Meacham, 2012, p. 105. The declaration was introduced on Friday, June 28, and congress began debate over its contents on Monday, July 1, resulting in the omission of a fourth of the text, including a passage critical of King George III and the slave trade.Ellis, 1996, p. 50. Jefferson resented the changes, but he did not speak publicly about the revisions. On July 4, 1776, the Congress ratified the Declaration, and delegates signed it on August 2 in doing so, they were committing an act of treason against the Crown.Meacham, 2012, p. 110. Jeffersons preamble is regarded as an enduring statement of human rights, and the phrase all men are created equal has been called one of the bestknown sentences in the English language containing the most potent and consequential words in American history.Ellis, 2008, pp. 55 56. Virginia state legislator and governor Governors Palace, Governor Jeffersons residence in Williamsburg At the start of the Revolution, Jefferson was a Colonel and was named commander of the Albemarle County Militia on September 26, 1775.Brodie, 1974, p. 112. He was then elected to the Virginia House of Delegates for Albemarle County in September 1776, when finalizing a state constitution was a priority.Peterson, 1970, pp. 101 02, 114, 140.Ferling, 2004, p. 26. For nearly three years, he assisted with the constitution and was especially proud of his Bill for Establishing Religious Freedom, which forbade state support of religious institutions or enforcement of religious doctrine.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 102 Bernstein, 2003, p. 42. The bill failed to pass, as did his legislation to disestablish the Anglican church, but both were later revived by James Madison.Peterson, 1970, pp. 134, 142 Bernstein, 2003, pp. 68 69. In 1778, Jefferson was given the task of revising the states laws. He drafted 126 bills in three years, including laws to streamline the judicial system. Jeffersons proposed statutes provided for general education, which he considered the basis of republican government. He had become alarmed that Virginias powerful landed gentry were becoming a hereditary aristocracy. He took the lead in abolishing what he called feudal and unnatural distinctions. He targeted laws such as entail and primogeniture by which the oldest son inherited all the land. The entail laws made it perpetual the one who inherited the land could not sell it, but had to bequeath it to his oldest son. As a result, increasingly large plantations, worked by white tenant farmers and by black slaves, gained in size and wealth and political power in the eastern tobacco areas. During the Revolutionary era, all such laws were repealed by the states that had them.Richard B. Morris, Primogeniture and Entailed Estates in America, Columbia Law Review , 27 , 24 51. in JSTOR Jefferson was elected governor for oneyear terms in 1779 and 1780.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 134. He transferred the state capital from Williamsburg to Richmond, and introduced measures for public education, religious freedom, and revision of inheritance laws.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 137. During General Benedict Arnolds 1781 invasion of Virginia, Jefferson escaped Richmond just ahead of the British forces, and the city was burned to the ground.Peterson, 1970, pp. 234 38.Meacham, 2012, pp. 133 35 Ellis, 1996, p. 66 GordonReed, 2008, pp. 136 37. General Charles Cornwallis that spring dispatched a cavalry force led by Banastre Tarleton to capture Jefferson and members of the Assembly at Monticello, but Jack Jouett of the Virginia militia thwarted the British plan. Jefferson escaped to Poplar Forest, his plantation to the west.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 157. When the General Assembly reconvened in June 1781, it conducted an inquiry into Jeffersons actions which eventually concluded that Jefferson had acted with honor but he was not reelected.Meacham, 2012, pp. 140 42. In April of the same year, his daughter Lucy died at age one. A second daughter of that name was born the following year, but she died at age three.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 263. Notes on the State of Virginia Jefferson received a letter of inquiry in 1780 about the geography, history, and government of Virginia from French diplomat Franois BarbMarbois, who was gathering data on the United States. Jefferson included his written responses in a book, Notes on the State of Virginia .Tucker, 1837, v. 1, pp. 165 66. He compiled the book over five years, including reviews of scientific knowledge, Virginias history, politics, laws, culture, and geography.Shuffelton, 1999 The book explores what constitutes a good society, using Virginia as an exemplar. Jefferson included extensive data about the states natural resources and economy, and wrote at length about slavery, miscegenation, and his belief that blacks and whites could not live together as free people in one society because of justified resentments of the enslaved.Notes on the State of Virginia, p. 149 Burstein, 2006, p. 146. He also wrote of his views on the American Indian and considered them as equals in body and mind to European settlers. Notes on the State of Virginia , 1853, Query XITJF Thomas Jeffersons Enlightenment and American Indians Notes was first published in 1785 in French and appeared in English in 1787.Bernstein, 2004, p. 78. Biographer George Tucker considered the work surprising in the extent of the information which a single individual had been thus able to acquire, as to the physical features of the state,Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 166. and Merrill D. Peterson described it as an accomplishment for which all Americans should be grateful.Peterson, 1970, ch. 5. Member of Congress Independence Hall Assembly Room where Jefferson served in Congress The United States formed a Congress of the Confederation following victory in the Revolutionary War and a peace treaty with Great Britain in 1783, to which Jefferson was appointed as a Virginia delegate. He was a member of the committee setting foreign exchange rates and recommended an American currency based on the decimal system which was adopted.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, pp. 172 73. He advised formation of the Committee of the States to fill the power vacuum when Congress was in recess.Peterson, 1970, p. 275. The Committee met when Congress adjourned, but disagreements rendered it dysfunctional.Rayner, 1834, p. 207. In the Congresss 1783 84 session, Jefferson acted as chairman of committees to establish a viable system of government for the new Republic and to propose a policy for the settlement of the western territories. Jefferson was the principal author of the Land Ordinance of 1784, whereby Virginia ceded to the national government the vast area that it claimed northwest of the Ohio River. He insisted that this territory should not be used as colonial territory by any of the thirteen states, but that it should be divided into sections which could become states. He plotted borders for nine new states in their initial stages and wrote an ordinance banning slavery in all the nations territories. Congress made extensive revisions, including rejection of the ban on slavery.Peterson, 1960, pp. 189 90.Finkelman, 1989, pp. 21 51. The provisions banning slavery were known later as the Jefferson Proviso they were modified and implemented three years later in the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 and became the law for the entire Northwest. Minister to France Portrait of Thomas Jefferson while in London in 1786 by Mather Brown Jefferson was sent by the Congress of the Confederation to join Benjamin Franklin and John Adams as ministers in Europe for negotiation of trade agreements with England, Spain, and France. Some believed that the recently widowed Jefferson was depressed and that the assignment would distract him from his wifes death.Peterson, 1970, pp. 289 94. With his young daughter Patsy and two servants, he departed in July 1784, arriving in Paris the next month.Stewart, 1997, p. 39.Meacham, 2012, p. 180. French foreign minister Count de Vergennes commented, You replace Monsieur Franklin, I hear. Jefferson replied, I succeed . No man can replace him.McCullough, 2001, p. 330. Franklin resigned as minister in March 1785 and departed in July.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 194. Jefferson had Patsy educated at the Pentemont Abbey. In 1786, he met and fell in love with Maria Cosway, an accomplished and married ItalianEnglish musician of 27. They saw each other frequently over a period of six weeks. She returned to Great Britain, but they maintained a lifelong correspondence.TJF Maria Cosway Jefferson sent for his youngest surviving child, nineyearold Polly, in June 1787. He also brought some of his slaves with him to Paris, including James Hemings, whom he had trained in French cuisine, and Jamess younger sister Sally Hemings.GordonReed, 2008, pp. 156, 164 68. According to Sallys son, Madison Hemings, the 16yearold Sally and Jefferson began a sexual relationship in Paris, where she became pregnant. According to this story, Hemings agreed to return to the United States only after Jefferson promised to free her children when they came of age. While in France, he became a regular companion of the Marquis de Lafayette, a French hero of the American Revolutionary War, and Jefferson used his influence to procure trade agreements with France.Bowers, 1945, p. 328.Burstein, 2010, p. 120. As the French Revolution began, Jefferson allowed his Paris residence, the Htel de Langeac, to be used for meetings by Lafayette and other republicans. He was in Paris during the storming of the Bastille and consulted with Lafayette while the latter drafted the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.Meacham, 2012, pp. 222 23. Jefferson often found his mail opened by postmasters, so he invented his own enciphering device, the Wheel Cipher he wrote important communications in code for the rest of his career.TJF Coded Messages Jefferson left Paris in September 1789, intending to return soon however, President George Washington appointed him the countrys first Secretary of State, forcing him to remain.Ellis, 1996, pp. 116 17. Jefferson remained a firm supporter of the French Revolution, while opposing its more violent elements.Ellis, 1996, p. 110 Wood, 2010, pp. 179 81. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson in 1791 at 49 by Charles Willson Peale Soon after returning from France, Jefferson accepted Washingtons invitation to serve as Secretary of State.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 334. Jefferson had initially expected to return to France, but Washington insisted that he be on his new Cabinet.Randall , p. 1. Pressing issues at this time were the national debt and the permanent location of the capital. Jefferson opposed a national debt, preferring that each state retire its own, in contrast to Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, who desired consolidation of various states debts by the federal government.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, pp. 364 69. Hamilton also had bold plans to establish the national credit and a national bank, but Jefferson strenuously opposed this and attempted to undermine his agenda, which nearly led Washington to dismiss him from his cabinet. Jefferson later left the cabinet voluntarily Washington never forgave him, and never spoke to him again.Chernow, 2004, p. 427. The second major issue was the capitals permanent location. Hamilton favored a capital close to the major commercial centers of the Northeast, while Washington, Jefferson, and other agrarians wanted it located to the south.Cooke, 1970, pp. 523 45. After lengthy deadlock, the Compromise of 1790 was struck, permanently locating the capital on the Potomac River, and the federal government assumed the war debts of all thirteen states. In the Spring of 1791, Jefferson and Congressman James Madison took a vacation to Vermont. Jefferson had been suffering from migraines and he was tired of Hamilton infighting. In May 1792, Jefferson was alarmed at the political rivalries taking shape he wrote to Washington, urging him to run for reelection that year as a unifying influence.Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 429. He urged the president to rally the citizenry to a party that would defend democracy against the corrupting influence of banks and monied interests, as espoused by the Federalists. Historians recognize this letter as the earliest delineation of DemocraticRepublican Party principles.Greider, 2010, p. 246. Jefferson, Madison, and other DemocraticRepublican organizers favored states rights and local control and opposed federal concentration of power, whereas Hamilton sought more power for the federal government.Wood, 2010, pp. 145 49. Jefferson supported France against Britain when the two nations fought in 1793, though his arguments in the Cabinet were undercut by French Revolutionary envoy EdmondCharles Gents open scorn for President Washington.Wood, 2010, pp. 186 88. In his discussions with British Minister George Hammond, Jefferson tried unsuccessfully to persuade the British to acknowledge their violation of the Treaty of Paris, to vacate their posts in the Northwest, and to compensate the U.S. for slaves whom the British had freed at the end of the war. Seeking a return to private life, Jefferson resigned the cabinet position in December 1793, perhaps to bolster his political influence from outside the administration.Ellis, 1996, p. 119 Meacham, 2012, pp. 283 84 Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 523. After the Washington administration negotiated the Jay Treaty with Great Britain , Jefferson saw a cause around which to rally his party and organized a national opposition from Monticello.Meacham, 2012, pp. 293 94. The treaty, designed by Hamilton, aimed to reduce tensions and increase trade. Jefferson warned that it would increase British influence and subvert republicanism, calling it the boldest act and Jay ever ventured on to undermine the government.Peterson, 1970, ch.8 ebook. The Treaty passed, but it expired in 1805 during Jeffersons administration and was not renewed. Jefferson continued his proFrench stance during the violence of the Reign of Terror, he declined to disavow the revolution To back away from France would be to undermine the cause of republicanism in America.Yarbrough, 2006, p. xx. Election of 1796 and Vice Presidency 1796 election results In the presidential campaign of 1796, Jefferson lost the electoral college vote to Federalist John Adams by 71 68 and was elected vice president because of a mistake in voting for Adams running mate. As presiding officer of the Senate, he assumed a more passive role than his predecessor John Adams. He allowed the Senate to freely conduct debates and confined his participation to procedural issues, which he called an honorable and easy role.Meacham, 2012, p. 305. Jefferson had previously studied parliamentary law and procedure for forty years, making him unusually well qualified to serve as presiding officer. In 1800, he published his assembled notes on Senate procedure as A Manual of Parliamentary Practice .Bernstein, 2003, pp. 117 18. Jefferson held four confidential talks with French consul Joseph Ltombe in the spring of 1797 where he attacked Adams, predicting that his rival would serve only one term. He also encouraged France to invade England, and advised Ltombe to stall any American envoys sent to Paris by instructing him to listen to them and then drag out the negotiations at length and mollify them by the urbanity of the proceedings.Elkins, 1994, p. 566. This toughened the tone that the French government adopted toward the Adams administration. After Adams initial peace envoys were rebuffed, Jefferson and his supporters lobbied for the release of papers related to the incident, called the XYZ Affair after the letters used to disguise the identities of the French officials involved.Chernow, 2004, p. 550. However, the tactic backfired when it was revealed that French officials had demanded bribes, rallying public support against France. The U.S. began an undeclared naval war with France known as the QuasiWar.Meacham, 2012, p. 312. During the Adams presidency, the Federalists rebuilt the military, levied new taxes, and enacted the Alien and Sedition Acts. Jefferson believed that these laws were intended to suppress DemocraticRepublicans, rather than prosecute enemy aliens, and considered them unconstitutional.Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 54. To rally opposition, he and James Madison anonymously wrote the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, declaring that the federal government had no right to exercise powers not specifically delegated to it by the states.Wood, 2010, pp. 269 71. The resolutions followed the interposition approach of Madison, in which states may shield their citizens from federal laws that they deem unconstitutional. Jefferson advocated nullification, allowing states to invalidate federal laws altogether.Meacham, 2012, p. 318. Jefferson warned that, unless arrested at the threshold, the Alien and Sedition Acts would necessarily drive these states into revolution and blood.Onuf, 2000, p. 73. Historian Ron Chernow claims that the theoretical damage of the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions was deep and lasting, and was a recipe for disunion, contributing to the American Civil War as well as later events.Chernow, 2004, p. 574. Washington was so appalled by the resolutions that he told Patrick Henry that, if systematically and pertinaciously pursued, the resolutions would dissolve the union or produce coercion.Chernow, 2004, p. 587. Jefferson and Madison moved to Philadelphia and founded the National Gazette in 1791, along with poet and writer Phillip Freneau, in an effort to counter Hamiltons Federalist policies, which Hamilton was promoting through the influential Federalist newspaper the Gazette of the United States. The National Gazette made particular criticism of the policies promoted by Alexander Hamilton, often through anonymous essays signed by the pen name Brutus at Jeffersons urging, which were actually written by Madison.Bernstein, 2003, p. 96. Jefferson had always admired Washingtons leadership skills but felt that his Federalist party was leading the country in the wrong direction. Jefferson thought it wise not to attend his funeral in 1799 because of acute differences with Washington while serving as Secretary of State, and remained at Monticello.Meacham, 2012, p. 323. Election of 1800 1800 election results In the 1800 presidential election, Jefferson contended once more against Federalist John Adams. Adams campaign was weakened by unpopular taxes and vicious Federalist infighting over his actions in the QuasiWar.Bernstein, 2003, pp. 126 28 McCullough, 2001, p. 556. Republicans pointed to the Alien and Sedition Acts and accused the Federalists of being secret monarchists, while Federalists charged that Jefferson was a godless libertine in thrall to the French.McCullough, 2001, pp. 543 44. Historian Joyce Appleby said the election was one of the most acrimonious in the annals of American history.Appleby, 2003, pp. 27 28. Republicans ultimately won more electoral college votes, but Jefferson and his vice presidential candidate Aaron Burr unexpectedly received an equal total. Due to the tie, the election was decided by the Federalistdominated House of Representatives.Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 75 Wood, 2010, p. 278. Hamilton lobbied Federalist representatives on Jeffersons behalf, believing him a lesser political evil than Burr. On February 17, 1801, after thirtysix ballots, the House elected Jefferson president and Burr vice president. The win was marked by Republican celebrations throughout the country.Meacham, 2012, pp. 340 41. Some of Jeffersons opponents argued that he owed his victory over Adams to the Souths inflated number of electors, due to counting slaves as partial population under the ThreeFifths Compromise.Ferling, 2004, p. 208. Others alleged that Jefferson secured James Asheton Bayards tiebreaking electoral vote by guaranteeing the retention of various Federalist posts in the government.Wood, 2010, pp. 284 85. Jefferson disputed the allegation, and the historical record is inconclusive.Meacham, 2012, pp. 337 38. The transition proceeded smoothly, marking a watershed in American history. As historian Gordon S. Wood writes, it was one of the first popular elections in modern history that resulted in the peaceful transfer of power from one party to another. Presidency Jefferson was sworn in by Chief Justice John Marshall at the new Capitol in Washington, D.C. on March 4, 1801. In contrast to his predecessors, Jefferson exhibited a dislike of formal etiquette he arrived alone on horseback without escort, dressed plainlyWood, 2010, pp. 287 88. and, after dismounting, retired his own horse to the nearby stable.Hale, 1896, Illustrious Americans, p. 124. His inaugural address struck a note of reconciliation, declaring, We have been called by different names brethren of the same principle. We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists.Meacham, 2012, pp. 348 50. Ideologically, Jefferson stressed equal and exact justice to all men, minority rights, and freedom of speech, religion, and press.Peterson , p. 40. He said that a free and democratic government was the strongest government on earth. He nominated moderate Republicans to his cabinet James Madison as Secretary of State, Henry Dearborn as Secretary of War, Levi Lincoln as Attorney General, and Robert Smith as Secretary of the Navy. Upon assuming office, he first confronted an 83 million national debt. He began dismantling Hamiltons Federalist fiscal system with help from Secretary of Treasury Albert Gallatin.Peterson, 2002, p. 41. Jeffersons administration eliminated the whiskey excise and other taxes after closing unnecessary offices and cutting useless establishments and expenses.Wood, 2010, p. 293.Bailey, 2007, p. 216. They attempted to disassemble the national bank and its effect of increasing national debt, but were dissuaded by Gallatin.Wills, 2002, pp. 50 51. Jefferson shrank the Navy, deeming it unnecessary in peacetime.Chernow, 2004, p. 671. Instead, he incorporated a fleet of inexpensive gunboats used only for defense with the idea that they would not provoke foreign hostilities. After two terms, he had lowered the national debt from 83 million to 57 million.Meacham, 2012, p. 387. Jefferson pardoned several of those imprisoned under the Alien and Sedition Acts.Meacham, 2012, p. 357. Congressional Republicans repealed the Judiciary Act of 1801, which removed nearly all of Adams midnight judges from office. A subsequent appointment battle led to the Supreme Courts landmark decision in Marbury v. Madison , asserting judicial review over executive branch actions.Meacham, 2012, p. 375. Jefferson appointed three Supreme Court justices William Johnson , Henry Brockholst Livingston , and Thomas Todd .Urofsky, 2006, p. viii. Jefferson strongly felt the need for a national military university, producing an officer engineering corps for a national defense based on the advancement of the sciences, rather than having to rely on foreign sources for top grade engineers with questionable loyalty.Scythes, 2014, pp. 693 94. He signed the Military Peace Establishment Act on March 16, 1802, thus founding the United States Military Academy at West Point. The Act documented in 29 sections a new set of laws and limits for the military. Jefferson was also hoping to bring reform to the Executive branch, replacing Federalists and active opponents throughout the officer corps to promote Republican values.Scythes, 2014, pp. 422 23. First Barbary War Barbary Coast of North Africa 1806. Left is Morocco at Gibraltar, center is Tunis, and right is Tripoli. American merchant ships had been protected from Barbary Coast pirates by the Royal Navy when the states were British colonies.FremontBarnes, 2006, p. 32. After independence, however, pirates often captured U.S. merchant ships, pillaged cargoes, and enslaved or held crew members for ransom. Jefferson had opposed paying tribute to the Barbary States since 1785.FremontBarnes, 2006, p. 36. In March 1786, he and John Adams went to London to negotiate with Tripolis envoy, ambassador Sidi Haji Abdrahaman .First Barbary War In 1801, he authorized a U.S. Navy fleet under Commodore Richard Dale to make a show of force in the Mediterranean, the first American naval squadron to cross the Atlantic.Meacham, 2012, pp. 364 65. Following the fleets first engagement, he successfully asked Congress for a declaration of war. The subsequent First Barbary War was the first foreign war fought by the U.S.Herring, 2008, p. 97. Pasha of Tripoli Yusuf Karamanli captured the USS Philadelphia , so Jefferson authorized William Eaton, the U.S. Consul to Tunis, to lead a force to restore the pashas older brother to the throne.Wood, 2010, p. 638. The American navy forced Tunis and Algiers into breaking their alliance with Tripoli. Jefferson ordered five separate naval bombardments of Tripoli, leading the pasha to sign a treaty that restored peace in the Mediterranean.Bernstein. 2003, p. 146. This victory proved only temporary, but according to Wood, many Americans celebrated it as a vindication of their policy of spreading free trade around the world and as a great victory for liberty over tyranny.Wood, 2010, p. 639. Louisiana Purchase The 1803 Louisiana Purchase totaled , doubling the size of the United States. Spain ceded ownership of the Louisiana territory in 1800 to the more predominant France. Jefferson was greatly concerned that Napoleons broad interests in the vast territory would threaten the security of the continent and Mississippi River shipping. He wrote that the cession works most sorely on the U.S. It completely reverses all the political relations of the U.S.Meacham, 2012, pp. 383 84. In 1802, he instructed James Monroe and Robert R. Livingston to negotiate with Napoleon to purchase New Orleans and adjacent coastal areas from France.Wood, 2010, p. 368. In early 1803, Jefferson offered Napoleon nearly 10 million for of tropical territory.Freehling, 2005, p. 69. Napoleon realized that French military control was impractical over such a vast remote territory, and he was in dire need of funds for his wars on the home front. In early April 1803, he unexpectedly made negotiators a counteroffer to sell of French territory for 15 million, doubling the size of the United States. U.S. negotiators seized this unique opportunity and accepted the offer and signed the treaty on April 30, 1803. Word of the unexpected purchase didnt reach Jefferson until July 3, 1803. He unknowingly acquired the most fertile tract of land of its size on Earth, making the new country selfsufficient in food and other resources. The sale also significantly curtailed British and French imperial ambitions in North America, removing obstacles to U.S. westward expansion.Ellis, 2008, pp. 207 08. Most thought that this was an exceptional opportunity, despite Republican reservations about the Constitutional authority of the federal government to acquire land.Wilentz, 2005, p. 108. Jefferson initially thought that a Constitutional amendment was necessary to purchase and govern the new territory but he later changed his mind, fearing that this would give cause to oppose the purchase, and he therefore urged a speedy debate and ratification.Meecham, 2012, pp. 389 90. On October 20, 1803, the Senate ratified the purchase treaty by a vote of 24 7.Tucker, 1837, v. 2, pp. 152 54. After the purchase, Jefferson preserved the regions Spanish legal code and instituted a gradual approach for integrating settlers into American democracy. He believed that a period of federal rule would be necessary while Louisianians adjusted to their new nation.Peterson, 1970, p. 777 Wood, 2010, p. 372 Ellis, 2008, p. 230. Historians have differed in their assessments regarding the constitutional implications of the sale,Ellis, 2008, pp. 231 32. but they typically hail the Louisiana acquisition as a major accomplishment. Frederick Jackson Turner called the purchase the most formative event in American history. Lewis and Clark expedition Corps of DiscoveryOctober 1805 Jefferson anticipated further westward settlements due to the Louisiana Purchase and arranged for the exploration and mapping of the uncharted territory. He sought to establish a U.S. claim ahead of competing European interests and to find the rumored Northwest Passage.Ambrose, 1996, pp. 76, 418. Jefferson and others were influenced by exploration accounts of Le Page du Pratz in Louisiana and Captain James Cook in the Pacific ,Ambrose, 1996, p. 154. and they persuaded Congress in 1804 to fund an expedition to explore and map the newly acquired territory to the Pacific Ocean.Rodriguez, 2002, pp. xxiv, 162, 185. Jefferson appointed Meriwether Lewis and William Clark to be leaders of the Corps of Discovery .Rodriguez, 2002, pp. 112, 186. In the months leading up to the expedition, Jefferson tutored Lewis in the sciences of mapping, botany, natural history, mineralogy, and astronomy and navigation, giving him unlimited access to his library at Monticello, which included the largest collection of books in the world on the subject of the geography and natural history of the North American continent, along with an impressive collection of maps.Ambrose, 1996, pp. 54, 80. The expedition lasted from May 1804 to September 1806 and obtained a wealth of scientific and geographic knowledge, including knowledge of many Indian tribes.Ambrose, 1996, pp. 154, 409, 512. Other expeditions In addition to the Corps of Discovery, Jefferson organized three other western expeditions the William Dunbar and George Hunter expedition on the Ouachita River , the Thomas Freeman and Peter Custis expedition on the Red River, and the Zebulon Pike expedition into the Rocky Mountains and the Southwest. All three produced valuable information about the American frontier.Berry, 2006, p. xi. American Indian policies Black Hoof, leader of the Shawnee, accepted Jeffersons Indian assimilation policies. Jeffersons experiences with the American Indians began during his boyhood in Virginia and extended through his political career and into his retirement. He refuted the contemporary notion that Indians were an inferior people and maintained that they were equal in body and mind to people of European descent.TJF American Indians As governor of Virginia during the Revolutionary War, Jefferson recommended moving the Cherokee and Shawnee tribes, who had allied with the British, to west of the Mississippi River. But when he took office as President, he quickly took measures to avert another major conflict, as American and Indian societies were in collision and the British were inciting Indian tribes from Canada.Miller, 2008, p. 90.Sheehan, 1974, pp. 120 21. In Georgia, he stipulated that the state would release its legal claims for lands to its west in exchange for military support in expelling the Cherokee from Georgia. This facilitated his policy of western expansion, to advance compactly as we multiply.Peterson, 1970, ch. 9. In keeping with his Enlightenment thinking, President Jefferson adopted an assimilation policy towards American Indians known as his civilization program which included securing peaceful U.S. Indian treaty alliances and encouraging agriculture. Jefferson advocated that Indian tribes should make federal purchases by credit holding their lands as collateral for repayment. Various tribes accepted Jeffersons policies, including the Shawnees led by Black Hoof, the Creek, and the Cherokees. However, some Shawnees broke off from Black Hoof, led by Tecumseh, and opposed Jeffersons assimilation policies.TJF President Jefferson and the Indian Nations Historian Bernard Sheehan argues that Jefferson believed that assimilation was best for American Indians second best was removal to the west. He felt that the worst outcome of the cultural and resources conflict between American citizens and American Indians would be their attacking the whites. Jefferson told Secretary of War General Henry Dearborn , If we are constrained to lift the hatchet against any tribe, we will never lay it down until that tribe is exterminated or driven beyond the Mississippi.The Life and Writings of Thomas Jefferson, pp. 265 66. Miller agrees that Jefferson believed that Indians should assimilate to American customs and agriculture. Historians such as Peter S. Onuf and Merrill D. Peterson argue that Jeffersons actual Indian policies did little to promote assimilation and were a pretext to seize lands.Miller, 2008, p. 94. Reelection in 1804 and second term 1804 Electoral College vote Jeffersons successful first term occasioned his renomination for president by the Republican party, with George Clinton replacing Burr as his running mate.Meacham, 2012, pp. 405 06. The Federalist party ran Charles Cotesworth Pinckney of South Carolina, John Adams vice presidential candidate in the 1800 election. The JeffersonClinton ticket won overwhelmingly in the electoral college vote, by 162 to 14, promoting their achievement of a strong economy, lower taxes, and the Louisiana Purchase. In March 1806, a split developed in the Republican party, led by fellow Virginian and former Republican ally John Randolph who viciously accused President Jefferson on the floor of the House of moving too far in the Federalist direction. In so doing, Randolph permanently set himself apart politically from Jefferson. Jefferson and Madison had backed resolutions to limit or ban British imports in retaliation for British actions against American shipping. Also, in 1808, Jefferson was the first president to propose a broad Federal plan to build roads and canals across several states, asking for 20 million, further alarming Randolph and believers of limited government.Meacham, 2012, pp. 415 17. Jeffersons popularity further suffered in his second term due to his response to wars in Europe. Positive relations with Great Britain had diminished, due partly to the antipathy between Jefferson and British diplomat Anthony Merry. After Napoleons decisive victory at the Battle of Austerlitz in 1805, Napoleon became more aggressive in his negotiations over trading rights, which American efforts failed to counter. Jefferson then led the enactment of the Embargo Act of 1807, directed at both France and Great Britain. This triggered economic chaos in the U.S. and was strongly criticized at the time, resulting in Jefferson having to abandon the policy a year later.Tucker, 1837, v. 2, pp. 291 94. During the revolutionary era, the states abolished the international slave trade, but South Carolina reopened it. In his annual message of December 1806, Jefferson denounced the violations of human rights attending the international slave trade, calling on the newly elected Congress to criminalize it immediately. In 1807, Congress passed the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves, which Jefferson signed.Miller, 1980, pp. 145 46.Randall, 1994, p. 583. The act established severe punishment against the international slave trade, although it did not address the issue domestically.Kaplan, 1999, p. 407. In the wake of the Louisiana Purchase, Jefferson sought to annex Florida from Spain, as brokered by Napoleon.Peterson, 2002, p. 49. Congress agreed to the Presidents request to secretly appropriate purchase money in the 2,000,000 Bill. The Congressional funding drew criticism from Randolph, who believed that the money would wind up in the coffers of Napoleon. The bill was signed into law however, negotiations for the project failed. Jefferson lost clout among fellow Republicans, and his use of unofficial Congressional channels was sharply criticized. In Haiti, Jeffersons neutrality had allowed arms to enable the slave independence movement during its Revolution, and blocked attempts to assist Napoleon, who was defeated there in 1803.Jefferson, Haiti The Journal of Southern History 61, no. 2 , p. 221. But he refused official recognition of the country during his second term, in deference to southern complaints about the racial violence against slaveholders it was eventually extended to Haiti in 1862.Bernstein, 2003, pp. 146 47. Domestically, Jeffersons grandson James Madison Randolph became the first child born in the White House in 1806.Malone, 1981, p. 11. Burr conspiracy and trial Aaron BurrVanderlyn, 1802 Following the 1801 electoral deadlock, Jeffersons relationship rapidly eroded with his Vice President, former New York Senator Aaron Burr. Jefferson suspected Burr of seeking the presidency for himself, while Burr was angered by Jeffersons refusal to appoint some of his supporters to federal office. Burr was dropped from the Republican ticket in 1804. The same year, Burr was soundly defeated in his bid to be elected New York governor. During the campaign, Alexander Hamilton publicly made callous remarks regarding Burrs moral character.Chernow, 2004, p. 714. Subsequently, Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel, mortally wounding and killing Hamilton on July 11, 1804. Burr was indicted for Hamiltons murder in New York and New Jersey, causing him to flee to Georgia, although he remained President of the Senate during Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chases impeachment trial.Wood, 2010, pp. 385 86. Both indictments quietly died and Burr was not prosecuted.Banner , p. 34. Also during the election, certain New England separatists approached Burr, desiring a New England federation and intimating that he would be their leader.Banner , pp. 34 35. However, nothing came of the plot, since Burr had lost the election and his reputation was ruined after killing Hamilton. In August 1804, Burr contacted British Minister Anthony Merry offering to capture U.S. western territory in return for money and British ships.The Burr Conspiracy After leaving office in April 1805, Burr traveled west and conspired with Louisiana Territory governor James Wilkinson, beginning a largescale recruitment for a military expedition.Peterson , p. 50. Other plotters included Ohio Senator John Smith and an Irishman named Harmon Blennerhassett. Burr discussed a number of plots seizing control of Mexico or Spanish Florida, or forming a secessionist state in New Orleans or the Western U.S. Historians remain unclear as to his true goal.Wood, 2010, pp. 385 86 Meacham, 2012, pp. 420, 422. In the fall of 1806, Burr launched a military flotilla carrying about 60 men down the Ohio River. Wilkinson renounced the plot, apparently from selfinterested motives he reported Burrs expedition to Jefferson, who immediately ordered Burrs arrest.Meacham, 2012, p. 420.Banner , p. 37. On February 13, 1807, Burr was captured in Louisianas Bayou Pierre wilderness and sent to Virginia to be tried for treason. Burrs 1807 conspiracy trial became a national issue.Appleby, 2003, p. 100 Bernstein, 2003, p. 162. Jefferson attempted to preemptively influence the verdict by telling Congress that Burrs guilt was beyond question, but the case came before his longtime political foe John Marshall, who dismissed the treason charge. Burrs legal team at one stage subpoenaed Jefferson, but Jefferson refused to testify, making the first argument for executive privilege. Instead, Jefferson provided relevant legal documents.Bernstein, 2003, pp. 163 64 Meacham, 2012, pp. 422 23. After a threemonth trial, the jury found Burr not guilty, while Jefferson denounced his acquittal.Banner, 1974, p. 37.Bernstein, 2003, p. 165.Appleby, 2003, p. 101. Jefferson subsequently removed Wilkinson as territorial governor but retained him in the U.S. military. Historian James N. Banner criticized Jefferson for continuing to trust Wilkinson, a faithless plotter. Chesapeake Leopard Affair and Embargo Act HMS Leopard firing upon USS Chesapeake The British conducted raids on American shipping and kidnapped seamen in 1806 07 thousands of Americans were thus impressed into the British naval service. In 1806, Jefferson issued a call for a boycott of British goods on April 18, Congress passed the NonImportation Acts, but they were never enforced. Later that year, Jefferson asked James Monroe and William Pinkney to negotiate with Great Britain to end the harassment of American shipping, though Britain showed no signs of improving relations. The Monroe Pinkney Treaty was finalized but lacked any provisions to end impressment, and Jefferson refused to submit it to the Senate for ratification.Hayes, 2008, pp. 504 05. The British ship HMS Leopard fired upon the USS Chesapeake off the Virginia coast in June 1807, and Jefferson prepared for war.TJF Embargo of 1807 He issued a proclamation banning armed British ships from U.S. waters. He presumed unilateral authority to call on the states to prepare 100,000 militia and ordered the purchase of arms, ammunition, and supplies, writing, The laws of necessity, of selfpreservation, of saving our country when in danger, are of higher obligation strict observance of written laws. The USS Revenge was dispatched to demand an explanation from the British government it also was fired upon. Jefferson called for a special session of Congress in October to enact an embargo or alternatively to consider war.Meacham, 2012, pp. 425 29. In December, news arrived that Napoleon had extended the Berlin Decree, globally banning British imports. In Britain, King George III ordered redoubling efforts at impressment, including American sailors. But the war fever of the summer faded Congress had no appetite to prepare the U.S. for war. Jefferson asked for and received the Embargo Act, an alternative that allowed the U.S. more time to build up defensive works, militias, and naval forces. Later historians have seen irony in Jeffersons assertion of such federal power. Meacham claims that the Embargo Act was a projection of power which surpassed the Alien and Sedition Acts, and R.B. Bernstein writes that Jefferson was pursuing policies resembling those he had cited in 1776 as grounds for independence and revolution.Meacham, 2012, p. 430 Bernstein, 2003, p. 168. A political cartoon showing merchants dodging the Ograbme, which is Embargo spelled backwards Secretary of State James Madison supported the embargo with equal vigor to Jefferson,Burstein, 2010, pp. 497 98. while Treasury Secretary Gallatin opposed it, due to its indefinite time frame and the risk that it posed to the policy of American neutrality.Meacham, 2012, p. 430. The U.S. economy suffered, criticism grew, and opponents began evading the embargo. Instead of retreating, Jefferson sent federal agents to secretly track down smugglers and violators.Tucker, 1990, v. 1, pp. 204 09, 232. Three acts were passed in Congress during 1807 and 1808, called the Supplementary , the Additional , and the Enforcement acts. The government could not prevent American vessels from trading with the European belligerents once they had left American ports, although the embargo triggered a devastating decline in exports. Most historians consider Jeffersons embargo to have been ineffective and harmful to American interests.Cogliano, 2008, p. 250 Meacham, 2012, p. 475. Appleby describes the strategy as Jeffersons least effective policy, and Joseph Ellis calls it an unadulterated calamity.Appleby, 2003, p. 145 Ellis, 1996, p. 237. Others, however, portray it as an innovative, nonviolent measure which aided France in its war with Britain while preserving American neutrality.Hayes, 2008, pp. 504 05 Kaplan, 1999, pp. 166 68. Jefferson believed that the failure of the embargo was due to selfish traders and merchants showing a lack of republican virtue. He maintained that, had the embargo been widely observed, it would have avoided war in 1812.Hayes, 2008, pp. 504 05 Peterson, 1960, pp. 289 90. In December 1807, Jefferson announced his intention not to seek a third term. He turned his attention increasingly to Monticello during the last year of his presidency, giving Madison and Gallatin almost total control of affairs.Ellis, 1996, p. 238 Appleby, 2003, pp. 128 29. Shortly before leaving office in March 1809, Jefferson signed the repeal of the Embargo. In its place, the NonIntercourse Act was passed, but it proved no more effective. The day before Madison was inaugurated as his successor, Jefferson said that he felt like a prisoner, released from his chains.Ellis, 1996, p. 238. Retirement and later years Following his retirement from the presidency, Jefferson continued his pursuit of educational interests he sold his vast collection of books to the Library of Congress, and founded and built the University of Virginia.Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 479. Jefferson continued to correspond with many of the countrys leaders, and the Monroe Doctrine bears a strong resemblance to solicited advice that Jefferson gave to Monroe in 1823.Meacham, 2012, pp. 481 82. As he settled into private life at Monticello, Jefferson developed a daily routine of rising early. He would spend several hours writing letters, with which he was often deluged. In the midday, he would often inspect the plantation on horseback. In the evenings, his family enjoyed leisure time in the gardens late at night, Jefferson would retire to bed with a book.TJF I Rise with the Sun However, his routine was often interrupted by uninvited visitors and tourists eager to see the icon in his final days, turning Monticello into a virtual hotel.Ellis, 1996, p. 232 Meacham, 2012, pp. 463 65. University of Virginia The University of Virginia, Jeffersons Academical Village Jefferson envisioned a university free of church influences where students could specialize in many new areas not offered at other colleges. He believed that education engendered a stable society, which should provide publicly funded schools accessible to students from all social strata, based solely on ability.U Va. Library He initially proposed his University in a letter to Joseph Priestley in 1800Adams, 1888, p. 48. and, in 1819, the 76yearold Jefferson founded the University of Virginia. He organized the state legislative campaign for its charter and, with the assistance of Edmund Bacon, purchased the location. He was the principal designer of the buildings, planned the universitys curriculum, and served as the first rector upon its opening in 1825.Peterson, 1970, ch. 11 ebook. Jefferson was a strong disciple of Greek and Roman architectural styles, which he believed to be most representative of American democracy. Each academic unit, called a pavilion, was designed with a twostory temple front, while the library Rotunda was modeled on the Roman Pantheon. Jefferson referred to the universitys grounds as the Academical Village, and he reflected his educational ideas in its layout. The ten pavilions included classrooms and faculty residences they formed a quadrangle and were connected by colonnades, behind which stood the students rows of rooms. Gardens and vegetable plots were placed behind the pavilions and were surrounded by serpentine walls, affirming the importance of the agrarian lifestyle.Hogan, 1987, pp. 28 29. The university had a library rather than a church at its center, emphasizing its secular nature a controversial aspect at the time.GordonReed, 2008, p. 649. When Jefferson died in 1826, James Madison replaced him as rector.TJF James Madison Jefferson bequeathed most of his library to the university.Crawford, 2008, p. 235. Reconciliation with Adams In 1804, Abigail Adams attempted to reconcile Jefferson and Adams. Jefferson and John Adams had been good friends in the first decades of their political careers, serving together in the Continental Congress in the 1770s and in Europe in the 1780s. The FederalistRepublican split of the 1790s divided them, however, and Adams felt betrayed by Jeffersons sponsorship of partisan attacks, such as those of James Callender. Jefferson, on the other hand, was angered at Adams for his appointment of midnight judges.Freeman, 2008, p. 12. The two men did not communicate directly for more than a decade after Jefferson succeeded Adams as president.Ellis, 2003, pp. 207, 209. A brief correspondence took place between Abigail Adams and Jefferson after Jeffersons daughter Polly died in 1804, in an attempt at reconciliation unknown to Adams. However, an exchange of letters resumed open hostilities between Adams and Jefferson. As early as 1809, Benjamin Rush, signer of the Declaration of Independence, desired that Jefferson and Adams reconcile and began to prod the two through correspondence to reestablish contact. In 1812, Adams wrote a short New Years greeting to Jefferson, prompted earlier by Rush, to which Jefferson warmly responded. Thus began what historian David McCullough calls one of the most extraordinary correspondences in American history.McCullough, 2001, pp. 603 05. Over the next fourteen years, the former presidents exchanged 158 letters discussing their political differences, justifying their respective roles in events, and debating the revolutions import to the world.Ellis, 2003, pp. 213, 230. When Adams died, his last words included an acknowledgement of his longtime friend and rival Thomas Jefferson survives, unaware that Jefferson had died several hours before.McCullough, 2001, p. 646.Ellis, 2003, p. 248. Autobiography In 1821, at the age of 77 Jefferson began writing his autobiography, in order to state some recollections of dates and facts concerning myself.Autobiography of Thomas Jefferson, 1743 1790 He focused on the struggles and achievements he experienced until July 29, 1790, where the narrative stopped short.Berstein, 2003, p. 179. He excluded his youth, emphasizing the revolutionary era. He related that his ancestors came from Wales to America in the early 17th century and settled in the western frontier of the Virginia colony, which influenced his zeal for individual and state rights. Jefferson described his father as uneducated, but with a strong mind and sound judgement. His enrollment in the College of William and Mary and election to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia in 1775 were included. He also expressed opposition to the idea of a privileged aristocracy made up of large land owning families partial to the King, and instead promoted the aristocracy of virtue and talent, which nature has wisely provided for the direction of the interests of society, scattered with equal hand through all its conditions, was deemed essential to a well ordered republic. Jefferson gave his insight about people, politics, and events. The work is primarily concerned with the Declaration and reforming the government of Virginia. He used notes, letters, and documents to tell many of the stories within the autobiography. He suggested that this history was so rich that his personal affairs were better overlooked, but he incorporated a selfanalysis using the Declaration and other patriotism.Hamelman, 2002, Journal Lafayette in 1824portrait by Scheffer, hanging in U.S. House of Representatives Lafayettes visit In the summer of 1824, the Marquis de Lafayette accepted an invitation from President James Monroe to visit the country. Jefferson and Lafayette had not seen each other since 1789. After visits to New York, New England, and Washington, Lafayette arrived at Monticello on November 4. Jeffersons grandson Randolph was present and recorded the reunion As they approached each other, their uncertain gait quickened itself into a shuffling run, and exclaiming, Ah Jefferson Ah Lafayette, they burst into tears as they fell into each others arms. Jefferson and Lafayette then retired to the house to reminisce.Mapp, 1991, p. 328. The next morning Jefferson, Lafayette, and James Madison attended a tour and banquet at the University of Virginia. Jefferson had someone else read a speech he had prepared for Lafayette, as his voice was weak and could not carry. This was his last public presentation. After an 11day visit, Lafayette bid Jefferson goodbye and departed Monticello.Malone, 1981, pp. 403 04 Brodie, 1998, p. 460 Crawford, 2008, pp. 202 03. Final days, death, and burial altObelisk at Thomas Jeffersons gravesite Jeffersons approximately 100,000 of debt weighed heavily on his mind in his final months, as it became increasingly clear that he would have little to leave to his heirs. In February 1826, he successfully applied to the General Assembly to hold a public lottery as a fund raiser.Ellis, 1996, pp. 287 88. His health began to deteriorate in July 1825, due to a combination of rheumatism from arm and wrist injuries, as well as intestinal and urinary disorders and, by June 1826, he was confined to bed. On July 3, Jefferson was overcome by fever and declined an invitation to Washington to attend an anniversary celebration of the Declaration.Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 551. During the last hours of his life, he was accompanied by family members and friends. On July 4 at 1250p.m., Jefferson died at age 83 on the fiftieth anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, and just a few hours before the death of John Adams.Rayner, 1834, pp. 428 29.Bernstein, 2003, p. 189. When Adams died, his last words included an acknowledgement of his longtime friend and rival Thomas Jefferson survives, though Adams was unaware that Jefferson had died several hours before.McCullough, 2001, p. 646Ellis, 2003, p. 248 The sitting president was Adams son John Quincy, and he called the coincidence of their deaths on the nations anniversary visible and palpable remarks of Divine Favor.Meacham, 2012, p. 496. Shortly after Jefferson had died, attendants found a gold locket on a chain around his neck, where it had rested for more than forty years, containing a small faded blue ribbon which tied a lock of his wife Marthas brown hair.Donaldson, 1898, p. 49. Jeffersons remains were buried at Monticello, under a selfwritten epitaph HERE WAS BURIED THOMAS JEFFERSON, AUTHOR OF THE DECLARATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, OF THE STATUTE OF VIRGINIA FOR RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, AND FATHER OF THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA.Thomas Jefferson Foundation Thomas Jefferson, A Brief Biography Jefferson died deeply in debt, unable to pass on his estate freely to his heirs.Bernstein, 2003, p. xii. He gave instructions in his will for disposal of his assets,Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 556. including the freeing of Sally Hemings childrenMeacham, 2012, p. 495. but his estate, possessions, and slaves were sold at public auctions starting in 1827.Ellis, 1996, p. 289. In 1831, Monticello was sold by Martha Jefferson Randolph and the other heirs.Thomas Jefferson Foundation Sale of Monticello Political, social, and religious views Jefferson subscribed to the political ideals expounded by John Locke, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton, whom he considered the three greatest men that ever lived.Hayes, 2008, p. 10.Cogliano, 2008, p. 14. He was also influenced by the writings of Gibbon, Hume, Robertson, Bolingbroke, Montesquieu, and Voltaire.Cogliano, 2008, p. 26. Jefferson thought that the independent yeoman and agrarian life were ideals of republican virtues. He distrusted cities and financiers, favored decentralized government power, and believed that the tyranny that had plagued the common man in Europe was due to corrupt political establishments and monarchies. He supported efforts to disestablish the Church of EnglandFerling, 2000, p. 158. wrote the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, and he pressed for a wall of separation between church and state.Mayer, 1994, p. 76. The Republicans under Jefferson were strongly influenced by the 18thcentury British Whig Party, who believed in limited government.Wood, 2010, p. 287. His DemocraticRepublican Party became dominant in early American politics, and his views became known as Jeffersonian democracy.Tucker, 1837, v. 2, pp. 559 67.Smith, 2003, p. 314. Society and government According to Jeffersons philosophy, citizens have certain inalienable rights and rightful liberty is unobstructed action according to our will, within limits drawn around us by the equal rights of others.Bassani, 2010, p. 113. A staunch advocate of the jury system to protect peoples liberties, he proclaimed in 1801, I consider by jury as the only anchor yet imagined by man, by which a government can be held to the principles of its constitution.Wilson, 2012, p. 584. Jeffersonian government not only prohibited individuals in society from infringing on the liberty of others, but also restrained itself from diminishing individual liberty as a protection against tyranny from the majority.Mayer, 1994, p. 328. Initially, Jefferson favored restricted voting to those who could actually have free exercise of their reason by escaping any corrupting dependence on others. He advocated enfranchising a majority of Virginians, seeking to expand suffrage to include yeoman farmers who owned their own land while excluding tenant farmers, city day laborers, vagrants, most Amerindians, and women. He was convinced that individual liberties were the fruit of political equality, which were threatened by arbitrary government.Peterson, 1960, p. 340. Excesses of democracy in his view were caused by institutional corruptions rather than human nature. He was less suspicious of a working democracy than many contemporaries.Wood, 2011, pp. 220 27. As president, Jefferson feared that the Federalist system enacted by Washington and Adams had encouraged corrupting patronage and dependence. He tried to restore a balance between the state and federal governments more nearly reflecting the Articles of Confederation, seeking to reinforce state prerogatives where his party was in a majority. Jefferson was steeped in the British Whig tradition of the oppressed majority set against a repeatedly unresponsive court party in the Parliament. He justified small outbreaks of rebellion as necessary to get monarchial regimes to amend oppressive measures compromising popular liberties. In a republican regime ruled by the majority, he acknowledged it will often be exercised when wrong.Golden Golden, 2002, p. 60. But the remedy is to set them right as to facts, pardon and pacify them.Meacham, 2012, p. 213. The full letter to William S. Smith can be seen at the Library of Congress As Jefferson saw his party triumph in two terms of his presidency and launch into a third term under James Madison, his view of the U.S. as a continental republic and an empire of liberty grew more upbeat. On departing the presidency in 1809, he described America as trusted with the destines of this solitary republic of the world, the only monument of human rights, and the sole depository of the sacred fire of freedom and selfgovernment.Bober, 2008, p. 264. Democracy Thomas Jefferson at age 78. Portrait by Thomas Sully hanging at West Point, commissioned by Faculty and Cadets, 1821. Jefferson considered democracy to be the expression of society, and promoted national selfdetermination, cultural uniformity, and education of all males of the commonwealth.Wood, 2010, p. 277. He supported public education and a free press as essential components of a democratic nation.Appleby, 2003, pp. 57 58, 84. After resigning as secretary of state in 1795, Jefferson focused on the electoral bases of the Republicans and Federalists. The Republican classification for which he advocated included the entire body of landholders everywhere and the body of laborers without land.Meacham, 2012, p. 298. Republicans united behind Jefferson as vice president, with the election of 1796 expanding democracy nationwide at grassroots levels.Wilentz, 2005, p. 85. Jefferson promoted Republican candidates for local offices.Meacham, 2012, p. 308. Beginning with Jeffersons electioneering for the revolution of 1800, his political efforts were based on egalitarian appeals.Wilentz, 2005, pp. 97 98. In his later years, he referred to the 1800 election as real a revolution in the principles of our government as that of 76 was in its form, one not effected indeed by the sword... but by the... suffrage of the people.Wilentz, 2005, p. 97. Voter participation grew during Jeffersons presidency, increasing to unimaginable levels compared to the Federalist Era, with turnout of about 67,000 in 1800 rising to about 143,000 in 1804.Wilentz, 2005, p. 138. At the onset of the Revolution, Jefferson accepted William Blackstones argument that property ownership would sufficiently empower voters independent judgement, but he sought to further expand suffrage by land distribution to the poor.Keyssar, 2009, p. 10. In the heat of the Revolutionary Era and afterward, several states expanded voter eligibility from landed gentry to all propertied male, taxpaying citizens with Jeffersons support.Ferling, 2004, p. 286. In retirement, he gradually became critical of his home state for violating the principle of equal political rights the social right of universal male suffrage.Keyssar, 2009, p. 37. He sought a general suffrage of all taxpayers and militiamen, and equal representation by population in the General Assembly to correct preferential treatment of the slaveholding regions.Wilentz, 2005, p. 200. Religion altA leatherbound Bible Baptized in his youth, Jefferson became a governing member of his local Episcopal Church in Charlottesville, which he later attended with his daughters.Randall, 1994, p. 203. Influenced by Deist authors during his college years Jefferson abandoned orthodox Christianity after his review of New Testament teachings.TJF Jeffersons Religious BeliefsOnuf, 2007, pp. 139 68. In 1803 he asserted, I am Christian, in the only sense in which Jesus wished any one to be. Jefferson later defined being a Christian as one who followed the simple teachings of Jesus. Jefferson compiled Jesus biblical teachings, omitting miraculous or supernatural references. He titled the work The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth , known today as the Jefferson Bible .Jefferson Bible, 1820 Peterson states Jefferson was a theist whose God was the Creator of the universe... all the evidences of nature testified to His perfection and man could rely on the harmony and beneficence of His work.Peterson, 1970, ch. 2 ebook. Jefferson was firmly anticlerical, writing in every age, the priest has been hostile to liberty... they have perverted the purest religion ever preached to man into mystery and jargon.Wood, 2010, p. 577. The full letter to Horatio Spatford can be read at the National Archives.U.S. Gov National Archives Jefferson once supported banning clergy from public office but later relented.Finkelman, 2006, p. 921. In 1777, he drafted the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. Ratified in 1786, it made compelling attendance or contributions to any statesanctioned religious establishment illegal and declared that men shall be free to profess... their opinions in matters of religion.Yarbrough, 2006, p. 28. The Statute is one of only three accomplishments he chose to have inscribed in the epitaph on his gravestone.Peterson, 2003, p. 315.W. W. Hening, ed., Statutes at Large of Virginia, vol. 12 84 86. Early in 1802, Jefferson wrote to the Danbury Connecticut Baptist Association, that religion is a matter which lies solely between Man and his God. He interpreted the First Amendment as having built a wall of separation between Church and State.Meacham, 2012, pp. 369 70. The phrase Separation of Church and State has been cited several times by the Supreme Court in its interpretation of the Establishment Clause. Jefferson donated to the American Bible Society, saying the Four Evangelists delivered a pure and sublime system of morality to humanity. He thought Americans would rationally create Apiarian religion, extracting the best traditions of every denomination.Meacham, 2012, pp. 472 73. And he contributed generously to several local denominations nearby Monticello.Randall, 1994, p. 555. Acknowledging organized religion would always be factored into political life for good or ill, he encouraged reason over supernatural revelation to make inquiries into religion. He believed in a creator god, an afterlife, and the sum of religion as loving God and neighbors. But he also controversially renounced the conventional Christian Trinity, denying Jesus divinity as the Son of God.Meacham, 2012, pp. 471 73.Sanford, 1984, pp. 85 86. Jeffersons unorthodox religious beliefs became an important issue in the 1800 presidential election.Wood, 2010, p. 586. Federalists attacked him as an atheist. As president, Jefferson countered the accusations by praising religion in his inaugural address and attending services at the Capitol. Banks Alexander Hamilton, national bank proponent and Jeffersons adversary Jefferson distrusted government banks and opposed public borrowing, which he thought created longterm debt, bred monopolies, and invited dangerous speculation as opposed to productive labor.Malone, 1981, pp. 140 43. In one letter to Madison, he argued each generation should curtail all debt within 19 years, and not impose a longterm debt on subsequent generations.Meacham, 2012, pp. 224 25. In 1791, President Washington asked Jefferson, then Secretary of State, and Hamilton, the Secretary of the Treasury, if the Congress had the authority to create a national bank. While Hamilton believed Congress had the authority, Jefferson and Madison thought a national bank would ignore the needs of individuals and farmers, and would violate the Tenth Amendment by assuming powers not granted to the federal government by the states.Wood, 2010, p. 144 Bailey, 2007, p. 82 Meacham, 2012, p. 249. Jefferson used agrarian resistance to banks and speculators as the first defining principle of an opposition party, recruiting candidates for Congress on the issue as early as 1792.Ferling, 2013, pp. 221 22. As president, Jefferson was persuaded by Secretary of Treasury Albert Gallatin to leave the bank intact, but sought to restrain its influence.Wood, 2010, pp. 293 95. Slavery Jeffersons 1795 Farm Book, page 30, lists 163 slaves at Monticello. Jefferson lived in a planter economy largely dependent upon slavery, and as a wealthy landholder, used slave labor for his household, plantation, and workshops. He first recorded his slaveholding in 1774, when he counted 41.Cogliano, 2006, p. 219 Onuf, 2007, p. 258. Over his lifetime he owned about 600 slaves he inherited about 175 while most of the remainder were born on his plantations.TJF Slavery at Monticello Property Jefferson purchased slaves in order to unite their families, and he sold about 110 for economic reasons, primarily slaves from his outlying farms.GordonReed, 2008, p. 292. Many historians have described Jefferson as a benevolent slaveownerBear, 1967, p. 99 Peterson, 1960, p. 535 Halliday, 2009, p. 236. who didnt overwork his slaves by the conventions of his time, and provided them log cabins with fireplaces, food, clothing and some household provisions, though slaves often had to make many of their own provisions. Additionally, Jefferson gave his slaves financial and other incentives while also allowing them to grow gardens and raise their own chickens. The whip was employed only in rare and extreme cases of fighting and stealing.TJF Thomas Jeffersons Monticello Slave Dwellings Jefferson once said, My first wish is that the labourers may be well treated. Jefferson did not work his slaves on Sundays and Christmas and he allowed them more personal time during the winter months.TJF Slavery at Monticello Work Some scholars doubt Jeffersons benevolence,Wiencek, 2012, pp. 114, 122. however, noting cases of excessive slave whippings in his absence. His nail factory was only staffed by child slaves, but many of those boys became tradesmen. Burwell Colbert, who started his working life as a child in Monticellos Nailery, was later promoted to the supervisory position of butler.TJF Thomas Jeffersons Monticello Nailery,Wiencek, 2012, p. 93. Jefferson felt slavery was harmful to both slave and master, but had reservations about releasing unprepared slaves into freedom and advocated gradual emancipation.TJF Thomas Jefferson and SlaveryFerling, 2000, p. 161.Howe, 2009, p. 74. In 1779, he proposed gradual voluntary training and resettlement to the Virginia legislature, and three years later drafted legislation allowing owners to free their own slaves.Meacham, p. 105. In his draft of the Declaration of Independence, he included a section, stricken by other Southern delegates, criticizing King George IIIs role in promoting slavery in the colonies.Meacham, p. 475. In 1784, Jefferson proposed the abolition of slavery in all western U.S. territories, limiting slave importation to 15 years.Ferling 2000, p. 287. Congress, however, failed to pass his proposal by one vote. In 1787, Congress passed the Northwest Ordinance, a partial victory for Jefferson that terminated slavery in the Northwest Territory. Jefferson freed his slave Robert Hemings in 1794 and he freed his cook slave James Hemings in 1796.Finkelman , p. 215. During his presidency Jefferson allowed the diffusion of slavery into the Louisiana Territory hoping to prevent slave uprisings in Virginia and to prevent South Carolina secession.Freehling, 2005, p. 70. In 1804, in a compromise on the slavery issue, Jefferson and Congress banned domestic slave trafficking for one year into the Louisiana Territory.Wiencek, 2012, pp. 257 58. In 1806 he officially called for antislavery legislation terminating the import or export of slaves. Congress passed the law in 1807, taking effect in 1818.Du Bois, 1904, pp. 95 96.Ferling 2000, p. 288. In 1819, he strongly opposed a Missouri statehood application amendment that banned domestic slave importation and freed slaves at the age of 25 on grounds it would destroy the union.Ferling 2000, pp. 286, 294. Jefferson freed his runaway slave Harriet Hemings in 1822. Upon his death in 1826, Jefferson freed five male Hemings slaves in his will.Finkelman , pp. 220 21. Jefferson shared the common belief of his day that blacks were mentally and physically inferior, but argued they nonetheless had innate human rights.Appleby, 2003, pp. 139 40. In Notes on the State of Virginia , he created controversy by calling slavery a moral evil for which the nation would ultimately have to account to God.Ellis, 1997, p. 87. He therefore supported colonization plans that would transport freed slaves to another country, such as Liberia or Sierra Leone, though he recognized the impracticability of such proposals.Helo, 2013, p. 105 Peterson, 1970, pp. 998 99 Meacham, 2012, p. 478. During his presidency Jefferson was for the most part publicly silent on the issue of slavery and emancipation,TJFJeffersons Antislavery Actions as the Congressional debate over slavery and its extension caused a dangerous northsouth rift among the states, with talk of a northern confederacy in New England.DiLorenzo, 1998, Yankee Confederates The violent attacks on white slave owners during the Haitian Revolution due to injustices under slavery supported Jeffersons fears of a race war, increasing his reservations about promoting emancipation at that time.Meacham, 2012, pp. 255, 275 78. After numerous attempts and failures to bring about emancipation,Ferling 2000, p. 287. Jefferson wrote privately in an 1805 letter to William A. Burwell, I have long since given up the expectation of any early provision for the extinguishment of slavery among us. That same year he also related this idea to George Logan, writing, I have most carefully avoided every public act or manifestation on that subject.TJF Quotations on slavery Historical assessment Scholars remain divided on whether Jefferson truly condemned slavery and how he changed.Finkelman , p. 215 Finkelman Alexander, 2010 Davis, 1999, p. 179. Francis D. Cogliano traces the development of competing emancipationist then revisionist and finally contextualist interpretations from the 1960s to the present. The emancipationist view, held by the various scholars at the Thomas Jefferson Foundation, Douglas L. Wilson, and others maintains Jefferson was an opponent of slavery all his life, noting that he did what he could within the limited range of options available to him to undermine it, his many attempts at abolition legislation, the manner in which he provided for slaves, and his advocacy of their more humane treatment.Landscape of Slavery Mulberry Row at Monticello TreatmentCogliano, 2008, p. 209. The revisionist view, advanced by Paul Finkelman and others criticizes Jefferson for racism, for holding slaves, and for acting contrary to his words, as Jefferson never freed most of his slaves, and he remained silent on the issue while he was President.Finkelman Contextualists such as Joseph J. Ellis emphasize a change in Jeffersons thinking from emancipationist before 1783, noting a shift toward public passivity and procrastination on policy issues related to slavery. Jefferson seemed to yield to public opinion by 1794 as he laid the groundwork for his first presidential campaign against Adams in 1796.Cogliano, 2008, pp. 218 20. Jefferson Hemings controversy Claims that Jefferson fathered Sally Hemings children have been debated since 1802. That year James T. Callender, after being denied a position as postmaster, alleged Jefferson had taken Hemings as a concubine and fathered several children with her.Hyland, 2009, pp. ix, 2 3. In 1998, a panel of researchers conducted a YDNA study of living descendants of Jeffersons uncle, Field, and of a descendant of Hemings son, Eston Hemings. The results, published in the journal Nature , showed a match with the male Jefferson line.Foster et al., 1998 According to the Thomas Jefferson Foundation, since the results of the DNA tests were made public, most historians believe Jefferson had a relationship with Hemings.TJF Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings A Brief Account In 2000, the Thomas Jefferson Foundation assembled a team of historians whose report concluded that the DNA study... indicates a high probability that Thomas Jefferson fathered Eston Hemings.TJF Report of the Research Committee on Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings Conclusions Other scholars maintain the evidence is insufficient to prove Jeffersons paternity conclusively. They note the possibility that additional Jefferson males, including his brother Randolph Jefferson and Randolphs five sons, could have fathered Eston Hemings or Sally Hemings other children.Hyland, 2009, pp. 30 31 Thomas Jefferson Heritage Society After Thomas Jeffersons death, although not formally manumitted, Sally Hemings was allowed by Jeffersons daughter Martha to live in Charlottesville as a free woman until her death in 1835.GordonReed, 1997, pp. 657 60. Interests and activities Virginia State Capitol, designed by Jefferson Jefferson was a farmer, obsessed with new crops, soil conditions, garden designs, and scientific agricultural techniques. His main cash crop was tobacco, but its price was usually low and it was rarely profitable. He tried to achieve selfsufficiency with wheat, vegetables, flax, corn, hogs, sheep, poultry, and cattle to supply his family, slaves, and employees, but he had cash flow problems and was always in debt.Hayes, 2008, p. 100 McEwan, 1991, pp. 20 39. In the field of architecture, Jefferson helped popularize the NeoPalladian style in the United States utilizing designs for the Virginia State Capitol, the University of Virginia, Monticello, and others.Berstein, 2003, p. 193 Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 202. Jefferson mastered architecture through selfstudy, using various books and classical architectural designs of the day. His primary authority was Andrea Palladios The Four Books of Architecture , which outlines the principles of classical design.Brodie, 1974, pp. 87 88 Bernstein, 2003, p. 9. He was interested in birds and wine, and was a noted gourmet he was also a prolific writer and linguist, and spoke several languages.Hayes, 2008, pp. 135 36. As a naturalist, he was fascinated by the Natural Bridge geological formation, and in 1774 successfully acquired the Bridge by grant from George III.Kastning, 2014, p. 8. American Philosophical Society Jefferson was a member of the American Philosophical Society for 35 years, beginning in 1780. Through the Society he advanced the sciences and Enlightenment ideals, emphasizing that knowledge of science reinforced and extended freedom.Hayes, 2008, p. 432. His Notes on the State of Virginia was written in part as a contribution to the Society.TJF American Philosophical Society He became the Societys third president on March 3, 1797, a few months after he was elected Vice President of the United States.Bernstein, 2003, pp. 118 19. In accepting, Jefferson stated I feel no qualification for this distinguished post but a sincere zeal for all the objects of our institution and an ardent desire to see knowledge so disseminated through the mass of mankind that it may at length reach even the extremes of society, beggars and kings. Jefferson served as APS President for the next eighteen years, including through both terms of his presidency. He introduced Meriwether Lewis to the Society, where various scientists tutored him in preparation for the Lewis and Clark Expedition.Ambrose, 1996, p. 126. He resigned on January 20, 1815, but remained active through correspondence.Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 399. Linguistics Jefferson had a lifelong interest in linguistics, could speak, read and write in a number of languages, including French, Greek, Italian, and German. In his early years he excelled in classical language while at boarding schoolUniv. Virginia archives Miller Center where he received a classical education in Greek and Latin.Andresen, 2006, Chap. 1. Jefferson later came to regard the Greek language as the perfect language as expressed in its laws and philosophy.Bober, 2008, p. 16. While attending the College of William Mary, he taught himself Italian.TJF Italy Language Here Jefferson first became familiar with the AngloSaxon language, especially as it was associated with English Common law and system of government and studied the language in a linguistic and philosophical capacity. He owned 17 volumes of AngloSaxon texts and grammar and later wrote an essay on the AngloSaxon language. Jefferson claimed to have taught himself Spanish during his nineteenday journey to France, using only a grammar guide and a copy of Don Quixote .TJF Spanish Language Linguistics played a significant role in how Jefferson modeled and expressed political and philosophical ideas. He believed that the study of ancient languages was essential in understanding the roots of modern language.Hellenbrand, 1990, pp. 155 56. He collected and understood a number of American Indian vocabularies and instructed Lewis and Clark to record and collect various Indian languages during their Expedition.Frawley, 2003, p. 96. When Jefferson removed from Washington after his presidency, he packed 50 Native American vocabulary lists in a chest and transported them on a river boat back to Monticello along with the rest of his possessions. Somewhere along the journey, a thief stole the heavy chest, thinking it was full of valuables, but its contents were dumped into the James River when the thief discovered it was only filled with papers. Subsequently, 30 years of collecting were lost, with only a few fragments rescued from the muddy banks of the river.American Philosophical Society, 2016 Gathering voices Jefferson was not an outstanding orator and preferred to communicate through writing or remain silent if possible. Instead of delivering his State of the Union addresses himself, Jefferson wrote the annual messages and sent a representative to read them aloud in Congress. This started a tradition which continued until 1913, when President Woodrow Wilson chose to deliver his own State of the Union address.TJF Public speaking Inventions Jefferson invented many small practical devices and improved contemporary inventions, including a revolving bookstand and a Great Clock powered by the gravitational pull on cannonballs. He improved the pedometer, the polygraph ,Univ. Virginia archives and the moldboard plow, an idea he never patented and gave to posterity.Malone, 1962, pp. 213 15. Jefferson can also be credited as the creator of the swivel chair, the first of which he created and used to write much of the Declaration of Independence.Kaplan, 1993, p. 315. As Minister to France, Jefferson was impressed by the military standardization program known as the Systme Gribeauval , and initiated a program as president to develop interchangeable parts for firearms. For his inventiveness and ingenuity, he received several honorary Doctor of Law degrees.Peterson, 1970, pp. 335 36. Historical reputation Jefferson Memorial, Washington, D.C. Jefferson is an icon of individual liberty, democracy, and republicanism, hailed as the author of the Declaration of Independence, an architect of the American Revolution, and a renaissance man who promoted science and scholarship.Peterson, 1960, pp. 5, 67 69, 189 208, 340. The participatory democracy and expanded suffrage he championed defined his era and became a standard for later generations.Appleby, 2006, p. 149. Meacham opined, he was the most influential figure of the democratic republic in its first half century, succeeded by presidential adherents James Madison, James Monroe, Andrew Jackson, and Martin Van Buren.Meacham, 2012, p. xix. Jefferson is recognized for having written more than 18,000 letters of political and philosophical substance during his life, which Francis D. Cogliano describes as a documentary legacy... unprecedented in American history in its size and breadth.Cogliano, 2008, p. 75. Jeffersons reputation declined during the Civil War due to his support of states rights. In the late 19th century, his legacy was widely criticized conservatives felt his democratic philosophy had led to that eras populist movement, while Progressives sought a more activist federal government than Jeffersons philosophy allowed. Both groups saw Hamilton as vindicated by history, rather than Jefferson, and President Woodrow Wilson even described Jefferson as though a great man, not a great American.Bernstein, 2003, pp. 191 92 Appleby, 2003, pp. 132 33. Thomas JeffersonMemorial Statue In the 1930s, Jefferson was held in higher esteem President Franklin D. Roosevelt and New Deal Democrats celebrated his struggles for the common man and reclaimed him as their partys founder. Jefferson became a symbol of American democracy in the incipient Cold War, and the 1940s and 50s saw the zenith of his popular reputation.Bernstein, 2003, pp. 192 94 Appleby, 2003, pp. 135 36. Following the Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 60s, Jeffersons slaveholding came under new scrutiny, particularly after DNA testing in the late 1990s supported allegations he had a relationship with Sally Hemings.Cogliano, 2008, p. 12 Appleby, 2003, p. 136, 140 Bernstein, 2003, pp. 194 97. Noting the huge output of scholarly books on Jefferson in recent years, historian Gordon Wood summarizes the raging debates about Jeffersons stature Although many historians and others are embarrassed about his contradictions and have sought to knock him off the democratic pedestal... his position, though shaky, still seems secure.Gordon S. Wood. Revealing the Total Jefferson, The New York Review of Books. June 23, 2016. The Siena Research Institute poll of presidential scholars, begun in 1982, has consistently ranked Jefferson as one of the five best U.S. presidents,SRI, 2010. and a 2015 Brookings Institution poll of American Political Science Association members ranked him as the fifth greatest president.Brookings, 2015 Memorials and honors Washington, Jefferson, T. Roosevelt and Lincoln sculptured into Mt Rushmore Jefferson has been memorialized with buildings, sculptures, postage, and currency. In the 1920s, Jefferson, together with George Washington, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln, was chosen by sculptor Gutzon Borglum and approved by President Calvin Coolidge to be depicted in stone at the Mount Rushmore Memorial.NPS Mt. Rushmore The Jefferson Memorial was dedicated in Washington, D.C. in 1943, on the 200th anniversary of Jeffersons birth. The interior of the memorial includes a statue of Jefferson and engravings of passages from his writings. Most prominent are the words inscribed around the monument near the roof I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man.Peterson, 1960, p. 378. Writings A Summary View of the Rights of British America Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms Declaration of Independence Memorandums taken on a journey from Paris into the southern parts of France and Northern Italy, in the year 1787 Notes on the State of Virginia Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coinage, Weights, and Measures of the United States A report submitted to Congress An Essay Towards Facilitating Instruction in the AngloSaxon and Modern Dialects of the English Language Manual of Parliamentary Practice for the Use of the Senate of the United States Autobiography Jefferson Bible, or The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth See also List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience List of Presidents of the United States who owned slaves List of abolitionist forerunners Jefferson Monroe Levy Notes References Bibliography Scholarly studies Boles, John B. Jefferson Architect of American Liberty 626 pages a biography GordonReed, Annette and Peter S. Onuf. Most Blessed of the Patriarchs Thomas Jefferson and the Empire of the Imagination , online review Johnson, Jeffrey K. The Countryside Triumphant Jeffersons Ideal of Rural Superiority in Modern Superhero Mythology. Journal of Popular Culture 434 720 37. online Malone, Dumas. Jefferson , Ebook Web site sources Thomas Jefferson Foundation sources Thomas Jefferson Foundation Primary sources The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, the Princeton University Press edition of the correspondence and papers vol 1 appeared in 1950 vol 41 appeared in 2014. Founders Online, searchable edition External links White House biography Thomas Jefferson Papers An Electronic Archive at the Massachusetts Historical Society Thomas Jefferson collection at the University of Virginia Library The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, subset of Founders Online from the National Archives Jefferson, Thomas, Summary View of the Rights of British America , online through World Digital Library The Papers of Thomas Jefferson at the Avalon Project Collection of Thomas Jefferson Manuscripts and Letters Category1743 births Category1826 deaths Thomas Category18thcentury American politicians Category18thcentury American writers Category19thcentury American politicians CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to France CategoryAmerican architects CategoryAmerican book and manuscript collectors CategoryAmerican deists CategoryAmerican foreign policy writers CategoryAmerican gardeners CategoryAmerican inventors CategoryAmerican male writers CategoryAmerican Neoclassical architects CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of Welsh descent CategoryAmerican planters CategoryAmerican political philosophers CategoryAmerican political writers CategoryAmerican slave owners CategoryAmerican surveyors CategoryAmerican Unitarians CategoryBurials at Monticello CategoryCollege of William Mary alumni CategoryContinental Congressmen from Virginia CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategoryEnlightenment philosophers CategoryFellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences CategoryIndependent scientists CategoryGovernors of Virginia CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryHouse of Burgesses members CategoryMembers of the American Antiquarian Society CategoryMembers of the American Philosophical Society CategoryMembers of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences CategoryMembers of the Virginia House of Delegates CategoryPeople from Albemarle County, Virginia CategoryPeople of the American Enlightenment CategoryPeople of Virginia in the American Revolution CategoryPhysiocrats CategoryPre19thcentury cryptographers CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRandolph family of Virginia CategoryAmerican religious skeptics CategorySigners of the United States Declaration of Independence CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1792 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1796 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1800 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1804 CategoryUnited States Secretaries of State CategoryUniversity and college founders CategoryUniversity of Virginia people CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryVirginia DemocraticRepublicans CategoryVirginia lawyers CategoryWashington administration cabinet members CategoryWriters from Virginia CategoryWriters of American Southern literature CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law CategoryPhilosophers from Virginia Category19thcentury American philosophers Category18thcentury Americanphilosophers
Theodore Roosevelt Jr. was an American statesman, author, explorer, soldier, and naturalist, who served as the 26th President of the United States from 1901 to 1909. He also served as the 25th Vice President of the United States from March to September 1901 and as the 33rd Governor of New York from 1899 to 1900. As a leader of the Republican Party during this time, he became a driving force for the Progressive Era in the United States in the early 20th century. His face is depicted on Mount Rushmore, alongside those of George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln. Roosevelt was born a sickly child with debilitating asthma, but he successfully overcame his physical health problems by embracing a strenuous lifestyle. He integrated his exuberant personality, vast range of interests, and worldfamous achievements into a cowboy persona defined by robust masculinity. Homeschooled, he began a lifelong naturalist avocation before attending Harvard College. His book, The Naval War of 1812 , established his reputation as both a learned historian and as a popular writer. Upon entering politics, he became the leader of the reform faction of Republicans in New Yorks state legislature. Following the nearsimultaneous deaths of his wife and mother, he escaped to a cattle ranch in the Dakotas. Roosevelt served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy under President William McKinley, but resigned from that post to lead the Rough Riders during the Spanish American War. Returning a war hero, he was elected Governor of New York in 1898. After the death of Vice President Garret Hobart, the New York state party leadership convinced McKinley to accept Roosevelt as his running mate in the 1900 election, moving Roosevelt to the prestigious but powerless role of vice president. Roosevelt campaigned vigorously and the McKinleyRoosevelt ticket won a landslide victory based on a platform of peace, prosperity, and conservatism. Following McKinleys assassination in September 1901, Roosevelt became president at age 42, and remains the youngest president. As a leader of the Progressive movement, he championed his Square Deal domestic policies, promising the average citizen fairness, breaking of trusts, regulation of railroads, and pure food and drugs. Making conservation a top priority, he established many new national parks, forests, and monuments intended to preserve the nations natural resources. In foreign policy, he focused on Central America, where he began construction of the Panama Canal. He expanded the Navy and sent the Great White Fleet on a world tour to project the United States naval power around the globe. His successful efforts to broker the end of the RussoJapanese War won him the 1906 Nobel Peace Prize. He avoided the controversial tariff and money issues. Elected in 1904 to a full term, Roosevelt continued to promote progressive policies, but many of his efforts and much of his legislative agenda were eventually blocked in Congress. Roosevelt successfully groomed his close friend, William Howard Taft, and Taft won the 1908 presidential election to succeed him. In polls of historians and political scientists, Roosevelt is generally ranked as one of the five best presidents. Frustrated with Tafts conservatism, Roosevelt belatedly tried to win the 1912 Republican nomination. He failed, walked out, and founded a third party, the Progressive, socalled Bull Moose Party, which called for wideranging progressive reforms. The split allowed the Democrats to win the White House. Following his election defeat, Roosevelt led a twoyear expedition to the Amazon basin, where he nearly died of tropical disease. During World War I, he criticized President Woodrow Wilson for keeping the country out of the war with Germany, and his offer to lead volunteers to France was rejected. Though he had considered running for president again in 1920, Roosevelts health continued to deteriorate, and he died in 1919. Early life and family Theodore Roosevelt at age 11 Roosevelts coat of arms, featuring a rose bush in reference to the name Roosevelt, which is Dutch for rose field Theodore Roosevelt Jr. was born on October 27, 1858, at East 20th Street in New York City. He was the second of four children born to socialite Martha Stewart Mittie Bulloch and businessman and philanthropist Theodore Roosevelt Sr. He had an older sister, Anna , a younger brother, Elliott, and a younger sister, Corinne. Elliott was later the father of First Lady Anna Eleanor Roosevelt, the wife of Theodores distant cousin, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. His paternal grandfather was of Dutch descent his other ancestry included primarily Scottish and ScotsIrish, English and smaller amounts of German, Welsh, and French. Theodore Sr. was the fifth son of businessman Cornelius Van Schaack C.V.S. Roosevelt and Margaret Barnhill. Theodores fourth cousin, James Roosevelt I, who was also a businessman, was the father of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Mittie was the younger daughter of Major James Stephens Bulloch and Martha P. Patsy Stewart. Through the Van Schaacks, Roosevelt was a descendant of the Schuyler family.Genealogy of the Oyster Bay Roosevelts. Almanac of Theodore Roosevelt Accessed March 14, 2015 Roosevelts youth was largely shaped by his poor health and debilitating asthma. He repeatedly experienced sudden nighttime asthma attacks that caused the experience of being smothered to death, which terrified both Theodore and his parents. Doctors had no cure. Nevertheless, he was energetic and mischievously inquisitive. His lifelong interest in zoology began at age seven when he saw a dead seal at a local market after obtaining the seals head, Roosevelt and two cousins formed what they called the Roosevelt Museum of Natural History. Having learned the rudiments of taxidermy, he filled his makeshift museum with animals that he killed or caught he then studied the animals and prepared them for display. At age nine, he recorded his observation of insects in a paper entitled The Natural History of Insects.. Roosevelts father significantly influenced him. His father was a prominent leader in New Yorks cultural affairs he helped to found the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and had been especially active in mobilizing support for the Union during the Civil War, even though his inlaws included Confederate leaders. Roosevelt said, My father, Theodore Roosevelt, was the best man I ever knew. He combined strength and courage with gentleness, tenderness, and great unselfishness. He would not tolerate in us children selfishness or cruelty, idleness, cowardice, or untruthfulness. Family trips abroad, including tours of Europe in 1869 and 1870, and Egypt in 1872, shaped his cosmopolitan perspective. Hiking with his family in the Alps in 1869, Roosevelt found that he could keep pace with his father. He had discovered the significant benefits of physical exertion to minimize his asthma and bolster his spirits. Roosevelt began a heavy regime of exercise. After being manhandled by two older boys on a camping trip, he found a boxing coach to teach him to fight and strengthen his weakened body.Arnaldo Testi, The gender of reform politics Theodore Roosevelt and the culture of masculinity. Journal of American History 81.4 1509 1533. online Roosevelt was minimally religious. He grew up in the Dutch Reformed Church, and gradually switched to attending his wifes Episcopalian church. Biographer Edmund Morris states Education Roosevelts taxidermy kitSanabria, Santa . Mounted in New Jersey. The Hudson Reporter . Roosevelt was mostly home schooled by tutors and his parents. Biographer H. W. Brands argued that The most obvious drawback to his home schooling was uneven coverage of the various areas of human knowledge. He was solid in geography and bright in history, biology, French, and German however, he struggled in mathematics and the classical languages. When he entered Harvard College on September 27, 1876 his father advised Take care of your morals first, your health next, and finally your studies. His fathers sudden death on February 9, 1878, devastated Roosevelt, but he eventually recovered and doubled his activities. He did well in science, philosophy, and rhetoric courses but continued to struggle in Latin and Greek. He studied biology intently and was already an accomplished naturalist and a published ornithologist he read prodigiously with an almost photographic memory. While at Harvard, Roosevelt participated in rowing and boxing he was once runnerup in a Harvard boxing tournament. Roosevelt was a member of the Alpha Delta Phi literary society, the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, and the prestigious Porcellian Club he was also an editor of The Harvard Advocate . In 1880, Roosevelt graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Harvard with an A.B. magna cum laude . Biographer Henry Pringle states Roosevelt, attempting to analyze his college career and weigh the benefits he had received, felt that he had obtained little from Harvard. He had been depressed by the formalistic treatment of many subjects, by the rigidity, the attention to minutiae that were important in themselves, but which somehow were never linked up with the whole. After his fathers death, Roosevelt had inherited 125,000, enough to live comfortably for the rest of his life. Roosevelt gave up his earlier plan of studying natural science and instead decided to attend Columbia Law School, moving back into his familys home in New York City. Roosevelt was an able law student, but he often found law to be irrational he spent much of his time writing a book on the War of 1812. Determined to enter politics, Roosevelt began attending meetings at Morton Hall, the 59th Street headquarters of New Yorks 21st District Republican Association. Though Roosevelts father had been a prominent member of the Republican Party, the younger Roosevelt made an unorthodox career choice for someone of his class, as most of Roosevelts peers refrained from becoming too closely involved in politics. Nonetheless, Roosevelt found allies in the local Republican Party, and he defeated an incumbent Republican state assemblyman closely tied to the political machine of Senator Roscoe Conkling. After his election victory, Roosevelt decided to drop out of law school, later saying, I intended to be one of the governing class. Naval history and strategy While at Harvard, Roosevelt began a systematic study of the role played by the young United States Navy in the War of 1812. Assisted by two uncles, he scrutinized original source materials and official U.S. Navy records. Roosevelts carefully researched book, published in 1882, remains one of the most important scholarly studies of the war, complete with drawings of individual and combined ship maneuvers, charts depicting the differences in iron throw weights of cannon shot between rival forces, and analyses of the differences between British and American leadership down to the shiptoship level. Published in 1882, The Naval War of 1812 was praised for its scholarship and style, and it showed Roosevelt to be a scholar of history. It remains a standard study of the war. With the publication of The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660 1783 in 1890, Navy Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan was immediately hailed as the worlds outstanding naval theorist by the leaders of Europe. Roosevelt paid very close attention to Mahans emphasis that only a nation with the worlds most powerful fleet could dominate the worlds oceans, exert its diplomacy to the fullest, and defend its own borders.Peter Karsten, The Nature of Influence Roosevelt, Mahan and the Concept of Sea Power. American Quarterly 234 585 600. in JSTORRichard W. Turk, The Ambiguous Relationship Theodore Roosevelt and Alfred Thayer Mahan online He incorporated Mahans ideas into his views on naval strategy for the remainder of his career.Carl Cavanagh Hodge, The Global Strategist The Navy as the Nations Big Stick, in Serge Ricard, ed., A Companion to Theodore Roosevelt pp 257 73Stephen G. Rabe, Theodore Roosevelt, the Panama Canal, and the Roosevelt Corollary Sphere of Influence Diplomacy, in Ricard, ed., A Companion to Theodore Roosevelt pp 274 92. First marriage and widowerhood On his 22nd birthday in 1880, Roosevelt married socialite Alice Hathaway Lee. Their daughter, Alice Lee Roosevelt, was born on February 12, 1884. Two days after giving birth, Roosevelts wife died due to an undiagnosed case of kidney failure , which had been masked by the pregnancy. In his diary, Roosevelt wrote a large X on the page and then, The light has gone out of my life. His mother, Mittie, had died of typhoid fever eleven hours earlier at 300a.m., in the same house. Distraught, Roosevelt left baby Alice in the care of his sister Bamie in New York City while he grieved. He assumed custody of his daughter when she was three. After the death of his wife and mother, Roosevelt focused on his work, specifically by reenergizing a legislative investigation into corruption of the New York City government, which arose from a concurrent bill proposing that power be centralized in the mayors office. For the rest of his life, he rarely spoke about his wife Alice and did not write about her in his autobiography. While working with Joseph Bucklin Bishop on a biography that included a collection of his letters, Roosevelt did not mention his marriage to Alice nor his second marriage to Edith Kermit Carow. Early political career Roosevelt as NY State Assemblyman, 1883 State Assemblyman Roosevelt was a member of the New York State Assembly in 1882, 1883 and 1884. He immediately began making his mark, specifically in corporate corruption issues.Edward P. Kohn, Theodore Roosevelts Early Political Career The Making of an Independent Republican and Urban Progressive in Ricard, A Companion to Theodore Roosevelt pp 27 44. He blocked a corrupt effort by financier Jay Gould to lower his taxes. Roosevelt exposed suspected collusion in the matter by Judge Theodore Westbrook, and argued for and received approval for an investigation to proceed, aiming for the impeachment of the judge. The investigation committee rejected impeachment, but Roosevelt had exposed the potential corruption in Albany, and thus assumed a high and positive political profile in multiple New York publications. Roosevelts anticorruption efforts helped him win reelection in 1882 by a margin greater than twotoone, an achievement made even more impressive by the fact that Democratic gubernatorial candidate Grover Cleveland won Roosevelts district. With Conklings Stalwart faction of the Republican Party in disarray following the assassination of President James Garfield, Roosevelt won election as the Republican party leader in the state assembly. He allied with Governor Cleveland to win passage of a civil service reform bill. Roosevelt won reelection a second time, and sought the office of Speaker of the New York State Assembly, but was defeated by Titus Sheard in a 41 to 29 vote of the GOP caucus.. In his final term, Roosevelt served as Chairman of the Committee on Affairs of Cities he wrote more bills than any other legislator.Edward P. Kohn, A Most Revolting State of Affairs Theodore Roosevelts Aldermanic Bill and the New York Assembly City Investigating Committee of 1884, American Nineteenth Century History 101 pp 71 92. Presidential election of 1884 With numerous presidential hopefuls to choose from, Roosevelt supported Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont, a colorless reformer. The state GOP preferred the incumbent president, New York Citys Chester Arthur, who was known for passing the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act. Arthur, at the time, was suffering from Brights disease, unknown to the public, and out of duty he did not contest his own nomination. Roosevelt fought hard and succeeded in influencing the Manhattan delegates at the state convention in Utica. He then took control of the state convention, bargaining through the night and outmaneuvering the supporters of Arthur and James G. Blaine he gained a national reputation as a key person in New York State.Putnam, 413 24 Roosevelt attended the 1884 GOP National Convention in Chicago and gave a speech convincing delegates to nominate African American John R. Lynch, an Edmunds supporter, to be temporary chair. Roosevelt fought alongside the Mugwump reformers however, Blaine, having gained support from Arthurs and Edmunds delegates, won the nomination by 541 votes on the fourth ballot. In a crucial moment of his budding political career, Roosevelt resisted the demand of the Mugwumps that he bolt from Blaine. He bragged about his one small success We achieved a victory in getting up a combination to beat the Blaine nominee for temporary chairman... To do this needed a mixture of skill, boldness and energy... to get the different factions to come in... to defeat the common foe. He was also impressed by an invitation to speak before an audience of ten thousand, the largest crowd he had addressed up to that date. Having gotten a taste of national politics, Roosevelt felt less aspiration for advocacy on the state level he then retired to his new Chimney Butte Ranch on the Little Missouri River.Putnam, 445 50 Roosevelt refused to join other Mugwumps in supporting Grover Cleveland, the governor of New York and the Democratic nominee in the general election. He debated the pros and cons of staying loyal with his political friend, Henry Cabot Lodge. After Blaine won the nomination, Roosevelt had carelessly said that he would give hearty support to any decent Democrat. He distanced himself from the promise, saying that it had not been meant for publication. When a reporter asked if he would support Blaine, Roosevelt replied, That question I decline to answer. It is a subject I do not care to talk about.Putnam, 445 In the end, he realized that he had to support Blaine to maintain his role in the GOP, and he did so in a press release on July 19.Putnam, 467 Having lost the support of many reformers, Roosevelt decided to retire from politics and move to North Dakota. Cowboy in Dakota Theodore Roosevelt as Badlands hunter in 1885. New York studio photo. Roosevelt moved West following the 1884 presidential election, and he built a second ranch named Elkhorn, which was north of the boomtown of Medora, North Dakota. Roosevelt learned to ride western style, rope and hunt on the banks of the Little Missouri. Though he earned the respect of the authentic cowboys, they were not overly impressed. However, he identified with the herdsman of history, a man he said possesses, few of the emasculated, milkandwater moralities admired by the pseudophilanthropists but he does possess, to a very high degree, the stern, manly qualities that are invaluable to a nation. He reoriented, and began writing about frontier life for national magazines he also published three books Hunting Trips of a Ranchman , Ranch Life and the HuntingTrail , and The Wilderness Hunter . Roosevelt brought his desire to address the common interests of citizens to the west. He successfully led efforts to organize ranchers to address the problems of overgrazing and other shared concerns his work resulted in the formation of the Little Missouri Stockmens Association. He was also compelled to coordinate conservation efforts and was able to form the Boone and Crockett Club, whose primary goal was the conservation of large game animals and their habitats. After the uniquely severe US winter of 1886 87 wiped out his herd of cattle and those of his competitors, and with it over half of his 80,000 investment, Roosevelt returned to the East. Though his finances suffered from the experience, Roosevelts time in the West helped remove the stigma of an ineffectual intellectual that could have hampered his political career. Second marriage On December 2, 1886, Roosevelt married his childhood and family friend, Edith Kermit Carow. Roosevelt was deeply troubled that his second marriage had taken place so soon after the death of his first wife, and he faced resistance from his sisters. Nonetheless, the couple married at St Georges, Hanover Square in London, England.. The couple had five children Theodore Ted III in 1887, Kermit in 1889, Ethel in 1891, Archibald in 1894, and Quentin in 1897. The couple also raised Roosevelts daughter from his first marriage, Alice, who often clashed with her stepmother. Reentering public life Upon Roosevelts return to New York in 1886, Republican leaders quickly approached him about running for mayor of New York City. Roosevelt accepted the nomination despite having little hope of winning the race against United Labor Party candidate Henry George and Democratic candidate Abram Hewitt. Roosevelt campaigned hard for the position, but Hewitt won with 41 , taking the votes of many Republicans who feared Georges radical policies. George was held to 31 , and Roosevelt took third place with 27 . Fearing that his political career might never recover, Roosevelt turned his attention to writing The Winning of the West , a historical work tracking the westward movement of Americans the book was a great success for Roosevelt, earning favorable reviews and selling numerous copies. Civil Service Commission After Benjamin Harrison unexpectedly defeated Blaine for the presidential nomination at the 1888 Republican National Convention, Roosevelt gave stump speeches in the Midwest in support of Harrison. On the insistence of Henry Cabot Lodge, President Harrison appointed Roosevelt to the United States Civil Service Commission, where he served until 1895. While many of his predecessors had approached the office as a sinecure, Roosevelt vigorously fought the spoilsmen and demanded enforcement of civil service laws. The New York Sun then described Roosevelt as irrepressible, belligerent, and enthusiastic. Roosevelt frequently clashed with Postmaster General John Wanamaker, who handed out numerous patronage positions to Harrison supporters, and Roosevelts attempt to force out several postal workers damaged Harrison politically. Despite Roosevelts support for Harrisons reelection bid in the presidential election of 1892, the eventual winner, Grover Cleveland, reappointed him to the same post. Roosevelts close friend and biographer, Joseph Bucklin Bishop, described his assault on the spoils system New York City Police Commissioner In 1894, a group of reform Republicans approached Roosevelt about running for Mayor of New York again he declined, mostly due to his wifes resistance to being removed from the Washington social set. Soon after he declined, he realized that he had missed an opportunity to reinvigorate a dormant political career. He retreated to the Dakotas for a time his wife Edith regretted her role in the decision and vowed that there would be no repeat of it. NYC Police Commissioner Roosevelt walks the beat with journalist Jacob Riis in 1894 Illustration from Riis autobiography. William Lafayette Strong, a reformminded Republican, won the 1894 mayoral election and offered Roosevelt a position on the board of the New York City Police Commissioners. Roosevelt became president of the board of commissioners and radically reformed the police force. Roosevelt implemented regular inspections of firearms and annual physical exams, appointed recruits based on their physical and mental qualifications rather than political affiliation, established Meritorious Service Medals, and closed corrupt police hostelries. During his tenure, a Municipal Lodging House was established by the Board of Charities, and Roosevelt required officers to register with the Board he also had telephones installed in station houses.Jay Stuart Berman, Police administration and progressive reform Theodore Roosevelt as police commissioner of New York In 1894, Roosevelt met Jacob Riis, the muckraking Evening Sun newspaper journalist who was opening the eyes of New Yorkers to the terrible conditions of the citys millions of poor immigrants with such books as How the Other Half Lives. Riis described how his book affected Roosevelt Roosevelt made a habit of walking officers beats late at night and early in the morning to make sure that they were on duty. He made a concerted effort to uniformly enforce New Yorks Sunday closing law in this, he ran up against boss Tom Platt as well as Tammany Hall he was notified that the Police Commission was being legislated out of existence. Roosevelt chose to defer rather than split with his party. As Governor of New York State, he would later sign an act replacing the Police Commission with a single Police Commissioner.. Emergence as a national figure Assistant Secretary of the Navy In the 1896 presidential election, Roosevelt backed Speaker of the House Thomas Brackett Reed for the Republican nomination, but William McKinley won the nomination and defeated William Jennings Bryan in the general election. Roosevelt opposed Bryans free silver platform, viewing many of Bryans followers as dangerous fanatics, and Roosevelt gave campaign speeches for McKinley. Urged by Congressman Henry Cabot Lodge, President McKinley appointed Roosevelt as the Assistant Secretary of the Navy in 1897.. Secretary of the Navy John D. Long was more concerned about formalities than functions, was in poor health, and left many major decisions to Roosevelt. Influenced by Alfred Thayer Mahan, Roosevelt called for a buildup in the countrys naval strength, particularly the construction of battleships. Roosevelt also began pressing his national security views regarding the Pacific and the Caribbean on McKinley, and was particularly adamant that Spain be ejected from Cuba. He explained his priorities to one of the Navys planners in late 1897 On February 15, 1898, the Maine exploded in the harbor of Havana, Cuba, killing hundreds of crew members. While Roosevelt and many other Americans blamed Spain for the explosion, McKinley sought a diplomatic solution. Without approval from Long or McKinley, Roosevelt sent out orders to several naval vessels, directing them to prepare for war. George Dewey, who had received an appointment to lead the Asiatic Squadron with the backing of Roosevelt, later credited his victory at the Battle of Manila Bay to Roosevelts orders. After finally giving up hope of a peaceful solution, McKinley asked Congress to declare war upon Spain, beginning the Spanish American War. Col. Theodore Roosevelt War in Cuba With the beginning of the Spanish American War in late April 1898, Roosevelt resigned from his post as Assistant Secretary of the Navy. Along with Army Colonel Leonard Wood, he formed the First US Volunteer Cavalry Regiment. His wife and many of his friends begged Roosevelt to remain in his post in Washignton, but Roosevelt was determined to see battle. When the newspapers reported the formation of the new regiment, Roosevelt and Wood were flooded with applications from all over the country. Referred to by the press as the Rough Riders, the regiment was one of many temporary units active only for the duration of the war. The regiment trained for several weeks in San Antonio, Texas, and in his autobiography Roosevelt wrote that his prior experience with the New York National Guard had been invaluable, in that it enabled him to immediately begin teaching his men basic soldiering skills. The Rough Riders used some standard issue gear and some of their own design, purchased with gift money. Diversity characterized the regiment, which included Ivy Leaguers, professional and amateur athletes, upscale gentlemen, cowboys, frontiersmen, Native Americans, hunters, miners, prospectors, former soldiers, tradesmen, and sheriffs. The Rough Riders were part of the cavalry division commanded by former Confederate general Joseph Wheeler, which itself was one of three divisions in the V Corps under Lieutenant General William Rufus Shafter. Roosevelt and his men landed in Daiquiri, Cuba, on June 23, 1898, and marched to Siboney. Wheeler sent parts of the 1st and 10th Regular Cavalry on the lower road northwest and sent the Rough Riders on the parallel road running along a ridge up from the beach. To throw off his infantry rival, Wheeler left one regiment of his Cavalry Division, the 9th, at Siboney so that he could claim that his move north was only a limited reconnaissance if things went wrong. Roosevelt was promoted to colonel and took command of the regiment when Wood was put in command of the brigade. The Rough Riders had a short, minor skirmish known as the Battle of Las Guasimas they fought their way through Spanish resistance and, together with the Regulars, forced the Spaniards to abandon their positions.. Colonel Roosevelt and the Rough Riders after capturing Kettle Hill along with members of the 3rd Volunteers and the regular Army black 10th Cavalry Under his leadership, the Rough Riders became famous for the charge up Kettle Hill on July 1, 1898, while supporting the regulars. Roosevelt had the only horse, and rode back and forth between rifle pits at the forefront of the advance up Kettle Hill, an advance that he urged despite the absence of any orders from superiors. He was forced to walk up the last part of Kettle Hill, because his horse had been entangled in barbed wire. The victories came at a cost of 200 killed and 1,000 wounded. Roosevelt commented on his role in the battles On the day of the big fight I had to ask my men to do a deed that European military writers consider utterly impossible of performance, that is, to attack over open ground an unshaken infantry armed with the best modern repeating rifles behind a formidable system of entrenchments. The only way to get them to do it in the way it had to be done was to lead them myself. In August, Roosevelt and other officers demanded that the soldiers be returned home. Roosevelt always recalled the Battle of Kettle Hill as the great day of my life and my crowded hour. In 2001, Roosevelt was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions he had been nominated during the war, but Army officials, annoyed at his grabbing the headlines, blocked it. After returning to civilian life, Roosevelt preferred to be known as Colonel Roosevelt or The Colonel, though Teddy remained much more popular with the public, even though Roosevelt openly despised that moniker. Men working closely with Roosevelt customarily called him Colonel or Theodore. Governor of New York After leaving Cuba in August 1898, the Rough Riders were transported to a camp at Montauk Point, Long Island, where Roosevelt and his men were briefly quarantined due to the War Departments fear of spreading yellow fever. Shortly after Roosevelts return to the United States, Republican Congressman Lemuel E. Quigg, a lieutenant of party boss Tom Platt, asked Roosevelt to run in the 1898 gubernatorial election. Platt disliked Roosevelt personally, feared that he would oppose Platts interests in office, and was reluctant to propel Roosevelt to the forefront of national politics. But Platt also needed a strong candidate due to the unpopularity of the incumbent Republican governor, Frank S. Black, and Roosevelt agreed to become the nominee and to try not to make war with the Republican establishment once in office. Roosevelt defeated Black in the Republican caucus by a vote of 753 to 218, and faced Democrat Augustus Van Wyck, a wellrespected judge, in the general election. Roosevelt campaigned vigorously on his war record, winning the election by a margin of just one percent. As governor, Roosevelt learned much about ongoing economic issues and political techniques that later proved valuable in his presidency. He was exposed to the problems of trusts, monopolies, labor relations, and conservation. Chessman argues that Roosevelts program rested firmly upon the concept of the square deal by a neutral state. The rules for the Square Deal were honesty in public affairs, an equitable sharing of privilege and responsibility, and subordination of party and local concerns to the interests of the state at large. By holding twicedaily press conferences which was an innovation Roosevelt remained connected with his middleclass political base. Roosevelt successfully pushed the Ford FranchiseTax bill, which taxed public franchises granted by the state and controlled by corporations, declaring that a corporation which derives its powers from the State, should pay to the State a just percentage of its earnings as a return for the privileges it enjoys. He rejected boss Thomas C. Platts worries that this approached Bryanite Socialism, explaining that without it, New York voters might get angry and adopt public ownership of streetcar lines and other franchises. The New York state government affected many interests, and the power to make appointments to policymaking positions was a key role for the governor. Platt insisted that he be consulted on major appointments Roosevelt appeared to comply, but then made his own decisions. Historians marvel that Roosevelt managed to appoint so many firstrate men with Platts approval. He even enlisted Platts help in securing reform, such as in the spring of 1899, when Platt pressured state senators to vote for a civil service bill that the secretary of the Civil Service Reform Association called superior to any civil service statute heretofore secured in America. Chessman argues that as governor, Roosevelt developed the principles that shaped his presidency, especially insistence upon the public responsibility of large corporations, publicity as a first remedy for trusts, regulation of railroad rates, mediation of the conflict of capital and labor, conservation of natural resources and protection of the less fortunate members of society. Roosevelt sought to position himself against the excesses of large corporations on the one hand and radical movements on the other. As the chief executive of the most populous state in the union, Roosevelt was widely considered a potential future presidential candidate, and supporters such as William Allen White encouraged him to run for president. Roosevelt had no interest in challenging McKinley for the Republican nomination in 1900, and was denied his preferred post of Secretary of War. As his term progressed, Roosevelt pondered a 1904 presidential run, but was uncertain about whether he should seek reelection as governor in 1900. Vice President In November 1899, Vice President Garret Hobart died of heart failure, leaving an open spot on the 1900 Republican national ticket. Though Henry Cabot Lodge and others urged him to run for vice president in 1900, Roosevelt was reluctant to take the powerless position and issued a public statement saying that he would not accept the nomination. Additionally, Roosevelt was informed by President McKinley and campaign manager Mark Hanna that he was not being considered for the role of vice president due to his actions prior to the Spanish American War. Eager to be rid of Roosevelt, Platt nonetheless began a newspaper campaign in favor of Roosevelts nomination for the vice presidency. Roosevelt attended the 1900 Republican National Convention as a state delegate and struck a bargain with Platt Roosevelt would accept the nomination if the convention offered it to him, but would otherwise serve another term as governor. Platt asked Pennsylvania party boss Matthew Quay to lead the campaign for Roosevelts nomination, and Quay outmaneuvered Hanna at the convention to put Roosevelt on the ticket. Roosevelt won the nomination unanimously. Roosevelt proved highly energetic and an equal match for Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryans famous barnstorming style of campaigning. In a whirlwind campaign that displayed his energy to the public, Roosevelt made 480 stops in 23 states. He denounced the radicalism of Bryan, contrasting it with the heroism of the soldiers and sailors who fought and won the war against Spain. Bryan had strongly supported the war itself, but he denounced the annexation of the Philippines as imperialism, which would spoil Americas innocence. Roosevelt countered that it was best for the Filipinos to have stability and the Americans to have a proud place in the world. With the nation basking in peace and prosperity, the voters gave McKinley an even larger victory than that which he had achieved in 1896.John M. Hilpert, American Cyclone Theodore Roosevelt and His 1900 WhistleStop Campaign . After the campaign, Roosevelt took office as vice president in March 1901. The office of Vice President was a powerless sinecure and did not suit Roosevelts aggressive temperament.. Roosevelts six months as Vice President were uneventful, and Roosevelt presided over the Senate for a mere four days before it adjourned. On September 2, 1901, Roosevelt first publicized an aphorism that thrilled his supporters at the Minnesota State Fair Speak softly and carry a big stick, and you will go far. Presidency On September 6, President McKinley was attending the PanAmerican Exposition in Buffalo, New York when he was shot by Leon Czolgosz. Roosevelt was vacationing in Vermont, and traveled to Buffalo to visit McKinley in the hospital. It appeared that McKinley would recover, so Roosevelt resumed his vacation in the Adirondacks. When McKinleys condition worsened, Roosevelt began the trip to Buffalo. McKinley died on September 14, and Roosevelt was informed while he was in North Creek he continued on to Buffalo and was sworn in at the Ansley Wilcox House. As there was no formally designated order of succession for the post in the event that a president resigned, became incapacitated, or died , Roosevelt served his first term without a vice president. McKinleys supporters were nervous about the new president, and Hanna was particularly bitter that the man he had opposed so vigorously at the convention had succeeded McKinley. Roosevelt assured party leaders that he intended to adhere to McKinleys policies, and he retained McKinleys Cabinet. Nonetheless, Roosevelt sought to position himself as the partys undisputed leader, seeking to bolster the role of the president and position himself for the 1904 election. Shortly after taking office, Roosevelt invited Booker T. Washington to dinner at the White House. To his dismay, this sparked a bitter, and at times vicious, reaction across the heavily segregated South. Roosevelt reacted with astonishment and protest, saying that he looked forward to many future dinners with Washington. Upon further reflection, Roosevelt wanted to ensure that this had no effect on political support in the South, and further dinner invitations to Washington were avoided their next meeting was scheduled as typical business at 1000am instead.Edmund Morris, Theodore Rex p58 Domestic policies Official White House portrait by John Singer Sargent Trust busting and regulation For his aggressive use of the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act, compared to his predecessors, Roosevelt became mythologized as the trustbuster but in reality he was more of a trust regulator. Roosevelt viewed big business as a necessary part of the American economy, and sought only to prosecute the bad trusts that restrained trade and charged unfair prices. He brought 44 antitrust suits, breaking up the Northern Securities Company, the largest railroad monopoly and regulating Standard Oil, the largest oil and refinery company. Presidents Benjamin Harrison, Grover Cleveland, and William McKinley combined prosecuted only 18 antitrust violations under the Sherman Antitrust Act. Bolstered by his partys success in the 1902 elections, Roosevelt proposed the creation of the United States Department of Commerce and Labor, which would include the Bureau of Corporations. While Congress was receptive to Department of Commerce and Labor, it was more skeptical of the antitrust powers that Roosevelt sought to endow within the Bureau of Corporations. Roosevelt successfully appealed to the public to pressure Congress, and Congress overwhelmingly voted to pass Roosevelts version of the bill. In a moment of frustration, House Speaker Joseph Gurney Cannon commented on Roosevelts desire for executive branch control in domestic policymaking That fellow at the other end of the avenue wants everything from the birth of Christ to the death of the devil. Biographer Brands states, Even his friends occasionally wondered whether there wasnt any custom or practice too minor for him to try to regulate, update or otherwise improve. In fact, Roosevelts willingness to exercise his power included attempted rule changes in the game of football at the Naval Academy, he sought to force retention of martial arts classes and to revise disciplinary rules. He even ordered changes made in the minting of a coin whose design he disliked, and ordered the Government Printing Office to adopt simplified spellings for a core list of 300 words, according to reformers on the Simplified Spelling Board. He was forced to rescind the latter after substantial ridicule from the press and a resolution of protest from the House of Representatives. Coal strike In May 1902, anthracite coal miners went on strike, threatening a national energy shortage. After threatening the coal operators with intervention by federal troops, Roosevelt won their agreement to an arbitration of the dispute by a commission, which succeeded in stopping the strike. The accord with J.P. Morgan resulted in the miners getting more pay for fewer hours, but with no union recognition.. Roosevelt said, My action on labor should always be considered in connection with my action as regards capital, and both are reducible to my favorite formula a square deal for every man. Roosevelt was the first president to help settle a labor dispute. Prosecuted misconduct During Roosevelts second year in office it was discovered there was corruption in the Indian Service, the Land Office, and the Post Office Department. Roosevelt, who had a high sense of morality and national purpose, investigated and prosecuted corrupt Indian agents who had cheated the Creeks and various tribes out of land parcels. Land fraud and speculation were found involving Oregon federal timberlands. In November 1902, Roosevelt and Secretary Ethan A. Hitchcock forced Binger Hermann, the General Land Office Commissioner, to resign office. On November 6, 1903 Francis J. Heney was appointed special prosecutor, and obtained 146 indictments involving an Oregon Land Office bribery ring. U.S. Senator John H. Mitchell was indicted for bribery to expedite illegal land patents, found guilty in July 1905, and sentenced to six months in prison. More corruption was found in the Postal Department, that brought on the indictments of 44 government employees on charges of bribery and fraud. Historians generally agree that Roosevelt moved quickly and decisively to prosecute misconduct in his administration. Railroads Merchants complained that some railroad rates were too high. In the 1906 Hepburn Act, Roosevelt sought to give the Interstate Commerce Commission the power to regulate rates, but the Senate, led by conservative Nelson Aldrich fought back. Roosevelt worked with the Democratic Senator Benjamin Tillman to pass the bill. Roosevelt and Aldrich ultimately reached a compromise that gave the ICC the power to replace existing rates with justandreasonable maximum rates, but allowed railroads to appeal to the federal courts on what was reasonable.John Morton Blum, The Republican Roosevelt pp 89 117 In addition to ratesetting, the Hepburn Act also granted the ICC regulatory power over pipeline fees, storage contracts, and several other aspects of railroad operations.Morris pp. 445448 Pure food and drugs Roosevelt responded to public anger over the abuses in the food packing industry by pushing Congress to pass the Meat Inspection Act of 1906 and the Pure Food and Drug Act. Though conservatives initially opposed the bill, Upton Sinclairs The Jungle , published in 1906, helped galvanize support for reform. The Meat Inspection Act of 1906 banned misleading labels and preservatives that contained harmful chemicals. The Pure Food and Drug Act banned food and drugs that were impure or falsely labeled from being made, sold, and shipped. Roosevelt also served as honorary president of the American School Hygiene Association from 1907 to 1908, and in 1909 he convened the first White House Conference on the Care of Dependent Children. Conservation Of all Roosevelts achievements, he was proudest of his work in conservation of natural resources, and extending federal protection to land and wildlife.Bakari, Mohamed ElKamel. Mapping the Anthropocentricecocentric Dualism in the History of American Presidency The Good, the Bad, and the Ambivalent. Journal of Studies in Social Sciences 14, no. 2 . Roosevelt worked closely with Interior Secretary James Rudolph Garfield and Chief of the United States Forest Service Gifford Pinchot to enact a series of conservation programs that often met with resistance from Western members of Congress such as Charles William Fulton. Nonetheless, Roosevelt established the United States Forest Service, signed into law the creation of five National Parks, and signed the 1906 Antiquities Act, under which he proclaimed 18 new U.S. National Monuments. He also established the first 51 bird reserves, four game preserves, and 150 National Forests, including Shoshone National Forest, the nations first. The area of the United States that he placed under public protection totals approximately .Douglas Brinkley, The Wilderness Warrior Theodore Roosevelt and the Crusade for America Roosevelt extensively used executive orders on a number of occasions to protect forest and wildlife lands during his tenure as President. By the end of his second term in office, Roosevelt used executive orders to establish 150 million acres of reserved forestry land. Roosevelt was unapologetic about his extensive use of executive orders to protect the environment, despite the perception in Congress that he was encroaching on too many lands. Eventually, Senator Charles Fulton attached an amendment to an agricultural appropriations bill that effectively prevented the president from reserving any further land. Before signing that bill into law, Roosevelt used executive orders to establish an additional 21 forest reserves, waiting until the last minute to sign the bill into law. In total, Roosevelt used executive orders to establish 121 forest reserves in 31 states. Prior to Roosevelt, only one president had issued over 200 executive orders, Grover Cleveland . The first 25 presidents issued a total of 1,262 executive orders. Roosevelt issued 1,081. Foreign policy This political cartoon depicts Theodore Roosevelts opposition to European influence in the Dominican Republic. In the late 1890s, Roosevelt had been an ardent imperialist, and he vigorously defended the permanent acquisition of the Philippines in the 1900 election campaign. After the rebellion ended in 1901, he largely lost interest in the Philippines and Asian expansion in general, despite the contradictory opinion of his Secretary of War, William Howard Taft. As president, he primarily focused the nations overseas ambitions on the Caribbean, especially locations that had a bearing on the defense of his pet project, the Panama Canal. Roosevelt also increased the size of the navy, and by the end of his second term the United States had more battleships than any other country besides Britain. Following the Spanish American War, Roosevelt believed that the United States had emerged as a world power, and he sought ways to assert Americas newlyeminent position abroad. In 1905, Roosevelt offered to mediate a treaty to end the RussoJapanese War. The parties agreed to meet in Portsmouth, New Hampshire and they resolved the final conflict over the division of Sakhalin Russia took the northern half, and Japan the south Japan also dropped its demand for an indemnity. Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize for his successful efforts in bringing about the Treaty of Portsmouth. George E. Mowry concludes that Roosevelt handled the arbitration well, doing an excellent job of balancing Russian and Japanese power in the Orient, where the supremacy of either constituted a threat to growing America.George E. Mowry, The First Roosevelt, The American Mercury, quote at p 580 onlineEugene P. Trani, The Treaty of Portsmouth An Adventure in American Diplomacy . Roosevelt also played a major role in mediating the First Moroccan Crisis by calling the Algeciras Conference, which averted war between France and Germany. Roosevelts presidency saw the strengthening of ties with Great Britain. The Great Rapprochement had begun with British support of the United States during the Spanish American War, and it continued as Britain withdrew its fleet from the Caribbean in favor of focusing on the rising German naval threat. In 1901, Britain and the United States signed the Hay Pauncefote Treaty, abrogating the Clayton Bulwer Treaty, which had prevented the United States from constructing a canal connecting the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean. The longstanding Alaska boundary dispute was settled on terms favorable to the United States, as Great Britain was unwilling to alienate the United States over what it considered to be a secondary issue. As Roosevelt later put it, the resolution of the Alaskan boundary dispute settled the last serious trouble between the British Empire and ourselves. The Gentlemens Agreement of 1907 resolved unpleasant racial tensions with Japan. Tokyo was angered over the segregation of Japanese children in San Francisco schools. The tensions were ended, but Japan also agreed not to allow unskilled workers to emigrate to the U.S. Latin America and Panama Canal In December 1902, the Germans, British, and Italians sought to impose a naval blockade against Venezuela in order to force the repayment of delinquent loans. Roosevelt was particularly concerned with the motives of Germanys Kaiser Wilhelm. He succeeded in getting the aggressors to agree to arbitration by a tribunal at The Hague, and averted the Venezuela Crisis of 1902 1903. The latitude granted to the Europeans by the arbiters was in part responsible for the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, which the President issued in 1904 Chronic wrongdoing or an impotence which results in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society, may in America, as elsewhere, ultimately require intervention by some civilized nation, and in the Western Hemisphere, the adherence of the United States to the Monroe doctrine may force the United States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrongdoing or impotence, to the exercise of an international police power. The U.S.s intentions to influence the area led to the separation of Panama from Colombia in 1903 The pursuit of an isthmus canal in Central America during this period focused on two possible routes Nicaragua and Panama, which was then a rebellious district within Colombia. Roosevelt convinced Congress to approve the Panamanian alternative, and a treaty was approved, only to be rejected by the Colombian government. When the Panamanians learned of this, a rebellion followed, was supported by Roosevelt, and succeeded. A treaty with the new Panama government for construction of the canal was then reached in 1903. Roosevelt received criticism for paying the bankrupt Panama Canal Company and the New Panama Canal Company 40,000,000 for the rights and equipment to build the canal. Critics charged that an American investor syndicate allegedly divided the large payment among themselves. There was also controversy over whether a French company engineer influenced Roosevelt in choosing the Panama route for the canal over the Nicaragua route. Roosevelt denied charges of corruption concerning the canal in a January 8, 1906 message to Congress. In January 1909, Roosevelt, in an unprecedented move, brought criminal libel charges against the New York World and the Indianapolis News known as the RooseveltPanama Libel Cases. Both cases were dismissed by U.S. District Courts, and on January 3, 1911, the U.S. Supreme Court, upon federal appeal, upheld the lower courts rulings. Historians are sharply critical of Roosevelts criminal prosecutions of the World and the News , but are divided on whether actual corruption in acquiring and building the Panama Canal took place. In 1906, following a disputed election, an insurrection ensued in Cuba Roosevelt sent Taft, the Secretary of War, to monitor the situation he was convinced that he had the authority to unilaterally authorize Taft to deploy Marines if necessary, without congressional approval. Examining the work of numerous scholars, Ricard reports that The most striking evolution in the twentyfirst century historiography of Theodore Roosevelt is the switch from a partial arraignment of the imperialist to a quasiunanimous celebration of the master diplomatist.... British relations these studies have underlined cogently Roosevelts exceptional statesmanship in the construction of the nascent twentiethcentury special relationship. ...The twentysixth presidents reputation as a brilliant diplomatist and realpolitician has undeniably reached new heights in the twentyfirst century...yet, his Philippine policy still prompts criticism.Serge Ricard, The State of Theodore Roosevelt Studies HDiplo Essay 116 Oct. 24 2014 Media Building on McKinleys effective use of the press, Roosevelt made the White House the center of news every day, providing interviews and photo opportunities. After noticing the reporters huddled outside the White House in the rain one day, he gave them their own room inside, effectively inventing the presidential press briefing. The grateful press, with unprecedented access to the White House, rewarded Roosevelt with ample coverage. Roosevelt normally enjoyed very close relationships with the press, which he used to keep in daily contact with his middleclass base. While out of office, he made a living as a writer and magazine editor. He loved talking with intellectuals, authors, and writers. He drew the line, however, at exposeoriented scandalmongering journalists who, during his term, set magazine subscriptions soaring by their attacks on corrupt politicians, mayors, and corporations. Roosevelt himself was not usually a target, but his speech in 1906 coined the term muckraker for unscrupulous journalists making wild charges. The liar, he said, is no whit better than the thief, and if his mendacity takes the form of slander he may be worse than most thieves. The press did briefly target Roosevelt in one instance. After 1904, he was periodically criticized for the manner in which he facilitated the construction of the Panama Canal. According to biographer Brands, Roosevelt, near the end of his term, demanded that the Justice Department bring charges of criminal libel against Joseph Pulitzers New York World . The publication had accused him of deliberate misstatements of fact in defense of family members who were criticized as a result of the Panama affair. Though an indictment was obtained, the case was ultimately dismissed in federal court it was not a federal offense, but one enforceable in the state courts. The Justice Department had predicted that result, and had also advised Roosevelt accordingly. Election of 1904 1904 election results The control and management of the Republican Party lay in the hands of Ohio Senator and Republican Party chairman Mark Hanna until McKinleys death. Roosevelt and Hanna frequently cooperated during Roosevelts first term, but Hanna left open the possibility of a challenge to Roosevelt for the 1904 Republican nomination. Roosevelt and Ohios other Senator, Joseph B. Foraker, forced Hannas hand by calling for Ohios state Republican convention to endorse Roosevelt for the 1904 nomination. Unwilling to break with the president, Hanna was forced to publicly endorse Roosevelt. Hanna and Pennsylvania Senator Matthew Quay both died in early 1904, and with the waning of Thomas Platts power, Roosevelt faced little effective opposition for the 1904 nomination. In deference to Hannas conservative loyalists, Roosevelt at first offered the party chairmanship to Cornelius Bliss, but he declined. Roosevelt turned to his own man, George B. Cortelyou of New York, the first Secretary of Commerce and Labor. To buttress his hold on the partys nomination, Roosevelt made it clear that anyone opposing Cortelyou would be considered to be opposing the President. The President secured his own nomination, but his preferred vicepresidential running mate, Robert R. Hitt, was not nominated. Senator Charles Warren Fairbanks of Indiana, a favorite of conservatives, gained the nomination. While Roosevelt followed the tradition of incumbents in not actively campaigning on the stump, he sought to control the campaigns message through specific instructions to Cortelyou. He also attempted to manage the presss release of White House statements by forming the Ananias Club. Any journalist who repeated a statement made by the president without approval was penalized by restriction of further access. Alton Brooks Parker The Democratic Partys nominee in 1904 was Alton Brooks Parker. Democratic newspapers charged that Republicans were extorting large campaign contributions from corporations, putting ultimate responsibility on Roosevelt, himself. Roosevelt denied corruption while at the same time he ordered Cortelyou to return 100,000 of a campaign contribution from Standard Oil. Parker said that Roosevelt was accepting corporate donations to keep damaging information from the Bureau of Corporations from going public. Roosevelt strongly denied Parkers charge and responded that he would go into the Presidency unhampered by any pledge, promise, or understanding of any kind, sort, or description.... Allegations from Parker and the Democrats, however, had little impact on the election, as Roosevelt promised to give every American a square deal. Roosevelt won 56 of the popular vote, and Parker received 38 Roosevelt also won the Electoral College vote, 336 to 140. Before his inauguration ceremony, Roosevelt declared that he would not serve another term. Democrats afterwards would continue to charge Roosevelt and the Republicans of being influenced by corporate donations during Roosevelts second term. Secondterm troubles Roosevelt family at Oyster Bay, circa 1903 As his second term progressed, Roosevelt moved to the left of his Republican Party base and called for a series of reforms, most of which failed to pass Congress. Roosevelts influence waned as he approached the end of his second term, as his promise to forego a third term made him a lame duck and his concentration of power provoked a backlash from many Congressmen. He sought a national incorporation law , called for a federal income tax , and an inheritance tax. In the area of labor legislation, Roosevelt called for limits on the use of court injunctions against labor unions during strikes injunctions were a powerful weapon that mostly helped business. He wanted an employee liability law for industrial injuries and an eighthour work day for federal employees. In other areas he also sought a postal savings system , and he asked for campaign reform laws.Ricard, ed. A companion to Theodore Roosevelt pp 160 66. The election of 1904 continued to be a source of contention between Republicans and Democrats. A Congressional investigation in 1905 revealed that corporate executives donated tens of thousands of dollars in 1904 to the Republican National Committee. In 1908, a month before the general presidential election, Governor Charles N. Haskell of Oklahoma, former Democratic Treasurer, said that Senators beholden to Standard Oil lobbied Roosevelt, in the summer of 1904, to authorize the leasing of Indian oil lands by Standard Oil subsidiaries. He said Roosevelt overruled his Secretary of Interior Ethan A. Hitchcock and granted a pipeline franchise to run through the Osage lands to the Prairie Oil and Gas Company. The New York Sun made a similar accusation and said that Standard Oil, a refinery who financially benefited from the pipeline, had contributed 150,000 to the Republicans in 1904 after Roosevelts alleged reversal allowing the pipeline franchise. Roosevelt branded Haskells allegation as a lie, pure and simple and obtained a denial from Shaw that Roosevelt had neither coerced Shaw nor overruled him. Postpresidency Roosevelt shortly after leaving office, October 1910 Election of 1908 Roosevelt enjoyed being president and was still relatively youthful, but felt that a limited number of terms provided a check against dictatorship. Roosevelt ultimately decided to stick to his 1904 pledge not to run for a third term. He personally favored Secretary of State Elihu Root as his successor, but Roots ill health made him an unsuitable candidate. New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes loomed as potentially strong candidate and shared Roosevelts progressivism, but Roosevelt disliked him and considered him to be too independent. Instead, Roosevelt settled on his Secretary of War, William Howard Taft, who had ably served under Presidents Harrison, McKinley, and Roosevelt in various positions. Roosevelt and Taft had been friends since 1890, and Taft had consistently supported President Roosevelts policies. Roosevelt was determined to install the successor of his choice, and wrote the following to Taft Dear Will Do you want any action about those federal officials I will break their necks with the utmost cheerfulness if you say the word Just weeks later he branded as false and malicious the charge was that he was using the offices at his disposal to favor Taft. At the 1908 Republican convention, many chanted for four years more of a Roosevelt presidency, but Taft won the nomination after Henry Cabot Lodge made it clear that Roosevelt was not interested in a third term. In the 1908 election, Taft easily defeated the Democratic nominee, threetime candidate William Jennings Bryan. Taft promoted a progressivism that stressed the rule of law he preferred that judges rather than administrators or politicians make the basic decisions about fairness. Taft usually proved to be a less adroit politician than Roosevelt and lacked the energy and personal magnetism, along with the publicity devices, the dedicated supporters, and the broad base of public support that made Roosevelt so formidable. When Roosevelt realized that lowering the tariff would risk creating severe tensions inside the Republican Party by pitting producers against merchants and consumers, he stopped talking about the issue. Taft ignored the risks and tackled the tariff boldly, encouraging reformers to fight for lower rates, and then cutting deals with conservative leaders that kept overall rates high. The resulting PayneAldrich tariff of 1909, signed into law early in President Tafts tenure, was too high for most reformers, and Tafts handling of the tariff alienated all sides. While the crisis was building inside the Party, Roosevelt was touring Africa and Europe, to allow Taft to be his own man.Stanley D. Solvick, William Howard Taft and the PayneAldrich Tariff. Mississippi Valley Historical Review pp 424 442 in JSTOR. Africa and Europe Roosevelt standing next to the elephant he shot on safari In March 1909, shortly after the end of his presidency, Roosevelt left New York for the SmithsonianRoosevelt African Expedition, a safari in east and central Africa. Roosevelts party landed in Mombasa, British East Africa and traveled to the Belgian Congo before following the Nile to Khartoum in modern Sudan. Financed by Andrew Carnegie and by his own writings, Roosevelts party hunted for specimens for the Smithsonian Institution and for the American Museum of Natural History in New York. The group, led by the legendary huntertracker RJ Cunninghame, included scientists from the Smithsonian, and was joined from time to time by Frederick Selous, the famous big game hunter and explorer. Participants on the expedition included Kermit Roosevelt, Edgar Alexander Mearns, Edmund Heller, and John Alden Loring. Roosevelt and his companions killed or trapped approximately 11,400 animals, from insects and moles to hippopotamuses and elephants. The 1,000 large animals included 512 big game animals, including six rare White rhinos. Tons of salted animals and their skins were shipped to Washington it took years to mount them all, and the Smithsonian shared many duplicate specimens with other museums. Regarding the large number of animals taken, Roosevelt said, I can be condemned only if the existence of the National Museum, the American Museum of Natural History, and all similar zoological institutions are to be condemned. He wrote a detailed account of the safari in the book African Game Trails , recounting the excitement of the chase, the people he met, and the flora and fauna he collected in the name of science. After his safari, Roosevelt traveled North to embark on a tour of Europe. Stopping first in Egypt, he commented favorably on British rule of the region, giving his opinion that Egypt was not yet ready for independence, paralleling his views about the Philippines. He refused a meeting with the Pope due to a dispute over a group of Methodists active in Rome, but met with Emperor Franz Joseph of AustriaHungary, Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, King George V of Great Britain, and other European leaders. In Oslo, Norway, Roosevelt delivered a speech calling for limitations on naval armaments, a strengthening of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, and the creation of a League of Peace among the world powers. He also delivered the Romanes Lecture at Oxford, in which he denounced those who sought parallels between the evolution of animal life and the development of society. Though Roosevelt attempted to avoid domestic politics during his time abroad, he met with Gifford Pinchot, who related his own disappointment with the Taft Administration. Pinchot had been forced to resign as head of the forest service after clashing with Tafts Interior Secretary, Richard Ballinger, who had prioritized development over conservation. Roosevelt returned to the United States in June 1910. Republican Party schism Punch depicts GOP Schism between Taft and TR Roosevelt had attempted to refashion Taft into a younger version of himself, but as soon as Taft began to display his individuality, the former president expressed his disenchantment. He was offended on election night when Taft indicated that his success had been possible not just through the efforts of Roosevelt, but also his brother Charley. Roosevelt was further alienated when Taft, intent on becoming his own man, did not consult him about cabinet appointments. Roosevelt and other progressives were also dissatisfied over Tafts conservation policies and his handling of the tariff, which had indirectly concentrated more power in the hands of conservative party leaders in Congress. Returning from Europe, Roosevelt urged progressives to take control of the Republican Party at the state and local level, and to avoid splitting the party in a way that would hand the presidency to the Democrats in 1912. Additionally, Roosevelt expressed optimism about the Taft Administration after meeting with the president in the White House in June 1910. In August 1910, Roosevelt gave notable speech at Osawatomie, Kansas, which was the most radical of his career and initiated his public break with the Taft administration and the conservative Republicans. Advocating a program of New Nationalism, Roosevelt emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests, a need to more effectively control corporate creation and combination, and proposed a ban on corporate political contributions. Returning to New York, Roosevelt began a battle to take control of the state Republican party from William Barnes, Jr., Tom Platts successor as the state party boss. Taft had pledged his support to Roosevelt in this endeavor, and Roosevelt was outraged when Tafts support failed to materialize at the 1910 state convention. Roosevelt nonetheless campaigned for the Republicans in the 1910 elections, which saw the Democrats gain control of the House for the first time since the 1890s. Among the newly elected Democrats was New York state senator Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who argued that he represented his cousins policies better than his Republican opponent. The Republican progressives interpreted the 1910 defeats as compelling argument for the complete reorganization of the party in 1911. Senator Robert M. La Follette Sr. of Wisconsin joined with Pinchot, William White, and California Governor Hiram Johnson to create the National Progressive Republican League their objectives were to defeat the power of political bossism at the state level and to replace Taft at the national level. Despite skepticism of La Follettes new league, Roosevelt expressed general support for progressive principles. Between January and April 1911, Roosevelt wrote a series of articles for The Outlook, defending what he called the great movement of our day, the progressive nationalist movement against special privilege, and in favor of an honest and efficient political and industrial democracy. With Roosevelt apparently uninterested in running in 1912, La Follette declared his own candidacy in June 1911. Roosevelt continually criticized Taft after the 1910 elections, and the break between the two men became final after the Justice Department filed an antitrust lawsuit against US Steel in September 1911 Roosevelt was humiliated by this suit because he had personally approved of an acquisition that the Justice Department was now challenging. However, Roosevelt was still unwilling to run against Taft in 1912 he instead hoped to run in 1916 against whichever Democrat beat Taft in 1912. Election of 1912 Roosevelt campaigning for president, 1912 Republican primaries and convention In November 1911, a group of Ohio Republicans endorsed Roosevelt for the partys nomination for president the endorsers included James R. Garfield and Dan Hanna. This was notable, as the endorsement was made by leaders of President Tafts home state. Roosevelt conspicuously declined to make a statement requested by Garfield that he flatly refuse a nomination. Soon thereafter, Roosevelt said, I am really sorry for Taft... I am sure he means well, but he means well feebly, and he does not know how He is utterly unfit for leadership and this is a time when we need leadership. In January 1912, Roosevelt declared if the people make a draft on me I shall not decline to serve. Later that year, Roosevelt spoke before the Constitutional Convention in Ohio, openly identifying as a progressive and endorsing progressive reforms even endorsing popular review of state judicial decisions. In reaction to Roosevelts proposals for popular overrule of court decisions, Taft said, Such extremists are not progressives they are political emotionalists or neurotics. Roosevelt began to envision himself as the savior of the Republican Party from defeat in the upcoming presidential election. In February 1912, Roosevelt announced in Boston, I will accept the nomination for president if it is tendered to me. I hope that so far as possible the people may be given the chance through direct primaries to express who shall be the nominee. Elihu Root and Henry Cabot Lodge thought that division of the party would lead to its defeat in the next election, while Taft believed that he would be defeated either in the Republican primary or in the general election. The 1912 primaries represented the first extensive use of the presidential primary, a reform achievement of the progressive movement. The Republican primaries in the South, where party regulars dominated, went for Taft, as did results in New York, Indiana, Michigan, Kentucky and Massachusetts. Meanwhile, Roosevelt won in Illinois, Minnesota, Nebraska, South Dakota, California, Maryland and Pennsylvania Roosevelt also won Tafts home state of Ohio. These primary elections, while demonstrating Roosevelts continuing popularity with the electorate, were not pivotal. The final credentials of the state delegates at the national convention were determined by the national committee, which was controlled by the party leaders, headed by the incumbent president. Prior to the 1912 Republican National Convention in Chicago, Roosevelt expressed doubt about his prospects for victory, noting that Taft had more delegates and control of the credentials committee. His only hope was to convince party leaders that the nomination of Taft would hand the election to the Democrats, but party leaders were determined not to cede their leadership to Roosevelt. The credentials committee awarded almost all contested delegates to Taft, and Taft won the nomination on the first ballot. Black delegates from the South played a key role they voted heavily for Taft and put him over the top. La Follette also helped Tafts candidacy he hoped that a deadlocked convention would result in his own nomination, and refused to release his delegates to support Roosevelt. The Progressive Party Once his defeat at the Republican convention appeared probable, Roosevelt announced that he would accept the progressive nomination on a progressive platform and I shall fight to the end, win or lose. At the same time, Roosevelt prophetically said, My feeling is that the Democrats will probably win if they nominate a progressive. Bolting from the Republican Party, Roosevelt and key allies such as Pinchot and Albert Beveridge created the Progressive Party, structuring it as a permanent organization that would field complete tickets at the presidential and state level. It was popularly known as the Bull Moose Party, after Roosevelt told reporters, Im as fit as a bull moose.. At the 1912 Progressive National Convention, Roosevelt cried out, We stand at Armageddon and we battle for the Lord. California Governor Hiram Johnson was nominated as Roosevelts running mate. Roosevelts platform echoed his 1907 8 proposals, calling for vigorous government intervention to protect the people from the selfish interests Though many Progressive party supporters in the North were supporters of civil rights for blacks, Roosevelt did not give strong support to civil rights and ran a lilywhite campaign in the South. Rival allwhite and allblack delegations from four southern states arrived at the Progressive national convention, and Roosevelt decided to seat the allwhite delegations.George E. Mowry, The South and the Progressive Lily White Party of 1912. Journal of Southern History 62 237 247. in JSTORArthur S. Link, The Negro as a Factor in the Campaign of 1912. Journal of Negro History 321 81 99. in JSTORArthur S. Link, Theodore Roosevelt and the South in 1912. North Carolina Historical Review 2333 313 324. in JSTOR Nevertheless, he won little support outside mountain Republican strongholds. Out of nearly 1100 counties in the South, Roosevelt won two counties in Alabama, one in Arkansas, seven in North Carolina, three in Georgia, 17 in Tennessee two in Texas, one in Virginia, and none in Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, or South Carolina.Edgar Eugene Robinson, The Presidential Vote 1896 1932 , pp 65 127. Assassination attempt The bulletdamaged speech and eyeglass case on display at the Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace On October 14, 1912, while campaigning in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Roosevelt was shot by a saloonkeeper named John Flammang Schrank. The bullet lodged in his chest after penetrating his steel eyeglass case and passing through a thick singlefolded copy of the speech titled Progressive Cause Greater Than Any Individual , which he was carrying in his jacket. Roosevelt, as an experienced hunter and anatomist, correctly concluded that since he was not coughing blood, the bullet had not reached his lung, and he declined suggestions to go to the hospital immediately. Instead, he delivered his scheduled speech with blood seeping into his shirt. He spoke for 90 minutes before completing his speech and accepting medical attention. His opening comments to the gathered crowd were, Ladies and gentlemen, I dont know whether you fully understand that I have just been shot, but it takes more than that to kill a Bull Moose.. Afterwards, probes and an xray showed that the bullet had lodged in Roosevelts chest muscle, but did not penetrate the pleura. Doctors concluded that it would be less dangerous to leave it in place than to attempt to remove it, and Roosevelt carried the bullet with him for the rest of his life. Election results After the Democrats nominated Governor Woodrow Wilson of New Jersey, Roosevelt did not expect to win the general election, as Wilson had compiled a record attractive to many progressive Democrats who might have otherwise considered voting for Roosevelt. Roosevelt still campaigned vigorously, and the election developed into a twoperson contest between Wilson and Roosevelt despite Tafts presence in the race. Roosevelt respected Wilson, but the two differed on various issues Wilson opposed any federal intervention regarding womens suffrage or child labor , and attacked Roosevelts tolerance of large businesses. Roosevelt won 4.1 million votes , compared to Tafts 3.5 million . Wilson gained 6.3 million votes and a massive landslide in the Electoral College, with 435 electoral votes Roosevelt won 88 electoral votes, while Taft won 8. Pennsylvania was the only eastern state won by Roosevelt in the Midwest, he carried Michigan, Minnesota, and South Dakota in the West, California, and Washington.Lewis L. Gould, Four Hats in the Ring The 1912 Election and the Birth of Modern American Politics Wilsons victory represented the first Democratic presidential election victory since Clevelands 1892 campaign, and it was the partys best performance in the Electoral College since 1852. Roosevelt, meanwhile, garnered a higher share of the popular vote than any other third party presidential candidate in history. 1913 1914 South American Expedition A friend of Roosevelts, Father John Augustine Zahm, persuaded Roosevelt to participate in an expedition to South America. To finance the expedition, Roosevelt received support from the American Museum of Natural History in return for promising to bring back many new animal specimens. Roosevelts popular book, Through the Brazilian Wilderness . describes his expedition into the Brazilian jungle in 1913 as a member of the RooseveltRondon Scientific Expedition, conamed after its leader, Brazilian explorer Cndido Rondon. From left to right Fr. John Augustine Zahm, Cndido Rondon, Kermit Roosevelt, Cherrie, Miller, four Brazilians, Roosevelt, Fiala. Only Roosevelt, Kermit, Cherrie, Rondon, and the Brazilians traveled down the River of Doubt. Once in South America, a new, far more ambitious goal was added to find the headwaters of the Rio da Duvida, and trace it north to the Madeira and thence to the Amazon River. It was later renamed Roosevelt River in honor of the former President. Roosevelts crew consisted of his son Kermit, naturalist Colonel Rondon, George K. Cherrie, sent by the American Museum of Natural History, Brazilian Lieutenant Joo Lira, team physician Dr. Jos Antonio Cajazeira, and 16 skilled paddlers and porters. The initial expedition started somewhat tenuously on December 9, 1913, at the height of the rainy season. The trip down the River of Doubt started on February 27, 1914. During the trip down the river, Roosevelt suffered a minor leg wound after he jumped into the river to try to prevent two canoes from smashing against the rocks. The flesh wound he received, however, soon gave him tropical fever that resembled the malaria he had contracted while in Cuba fifteen years before.. Because the bullet lodged in his chest from the assassination attempt in 1912 was never removed, his health worsened from the infection. This weakened Roosevelt so greatly that six weeks into the adventure, he had to be attended to day and night by the expeditions physician and his son Kermit. By then, he could not walk because of the infection in his injured leg and an infirmity in the other, which was due to a traffic accident a decade earlier. Roosevelt was riddled with chest pains, fighting a fever that soared to and at times made him delirious. Regarding his condition as a threat to the survival of the others, Roosevelt insisted he be left behind to allow the poorly provisioned expedition to proceed as rapidly as it could. Only an appeal by his son persuaded him to continue.Millard, The river of doubt Theodore Roosevelts darkest journey . Despite Roosevelts continued decline and loss of over , Commander Rondon reduced the pace of the expedition to allow for his commissions mapmaking and other geographical tasks, which required regular stops to fix the expeditions position by sunbased survey. Upon Roosevelts return to New York, friends and family were startled by his physical appearance and fatigue. Roosevelt wrote, perhaps prophetically, to a friend that the trip had cut his life short by ten years. For the rest of his few remaining years, he would be plagued by flareups of malaria and leg inflammations so severe as to require surgery. Before Roosevelt had even completed his sea voyage home, critics raised doubts over his claims of exploring and navigating a completely uncharted river over long. When he had recovered sufficiently, he addressed a standingroomonly convention organized in Washington, D.C., by the National Geographic Society and satisfactorily defended his claims. Final years ExPresident Theodore Roosevelt in Allentown, Pennsylvania, 1914 Roosevelt returned to the United States in May 1914. Though he was outraged by the Wilson Administrations conclusion of a treaty that expressed sincere regret for the way in which the United States had acquired the Panama Canal Zone, he was impressed by many of the reforms passed under Wilson. Roosevelt made several campaign appearances for the Progressives, but the 1914 elections were a disaster for the fledgling third party. Roosevelt began to envision another campaign for president, this time with himself at the head of the Republican Party, but conservative party leaders remained opposed to Roosevelt. In hopes of engineering a joint nomination, the Progressives scheduled the 1916 Progressive National Convention at the same time as the 1916 Republican National Convention. When the Republicans nominated Charles Evans Hughes, Roosevelt declined the Progressive nomination and urged his Progressive followers to support the Republican candidate. Though Roosevelt had long disliked Hughes, he disliked Wilson even more, and he campaigned energetically for the Republican nominee. However, Wilson won the 1916 election by a narrow margin. The Progressives disappeared as a party following the 1916 election, and Roosevelt and many of his followers permanently rejoined the Republican Party. When World War I began in 1914, Roosevelt strongly supported the Allies and demanded a harsher policy against Germany, especially regarding submarine warfare. Roosevelt angrily denounced the foreign policy of President Wilson, calling it a failure regarding the atrocities in Belgium and the violations of American rights. In 1916, while campaigning for Hughes, Roosevelt repeatedly denounced IrishAmericans and GermanAmericans whom he described as unpatriotic, saying they put the interests of Ireland and Germany ahead of Americas by supporting neutrality. He insisted that one had to be 100 American, not a hyphenated American who juggled multiple loyalties. In March 1917, Congress gave Roosevelt the authority to raise a maximum of four divisions similar to the Rough Riders, and Major Frederick Russell Burnham was put in charge of both the general organization and recruitment. However, President Wilson announced to the press that he would not send Roosevelt and his volunteers to France, but instead would send an American Expeditionary Force under the command of General John J. Pershing. Roosevelt never forgave Wilson, and quickly published The Foes of Our Own Household, an indictment of the sitting president.. Roosevelts youngest son, Quentin, a pilot with the American forces in France, was shot down behind German lines on July 14, 1918, at the age of 20. It is said that Quentins death distressed Roosevelt so much that he never recovered from his loss.Dalton p. 507 Roosevelts attacks on Wilson helped the Republicans win control of Congress in the offyear elections of 1918. He declined a request from New York Republican to run for another gubernatorial term, but attacked Wilsons Fourteen Points, calling instead for the unconditional surrender of Germany. He was cautiously optimistic about the proposed League of Nations, but had reservations about its impact on United States sovereignty. Roosevelt was popular enough to contest the 1920 Republican nomination, but his health was broken by 1918 due to the lingering effects of malaria. His family and supporters threw their support behind Roosevelts old military companion, General Leonard Wood, but Taft supporter Warren G. Harding defeated Wood on the tenth ballot of the 1920 Republican National Convention.Pietrusza, David. 1920 The Year of the Six Presidents , pp. 55 71 , 167 75 . Death Roosevelts grave, Oyster Bay, New York On the night of January 5, 1919, Roosevelt suffered breathing problems. After receiving treatment from his physician, Dr. George W. Faller, he felt better and went to bed. Roosevelts last words were Please put out that light, James to his family servant James Amos. Between 400 and 415 the next morning, Roosevelt died in his sleep at Sagamore Hill after a blood clot had detached from a vein and traveled to his lungs. He was sixty years old. Upon receiving word of his death, his son Archibald telegraphed his siblings The old lion is dead. Woodrow Wilsons vice president, Thomas R. Marshall, said that Death had to take Roosevelt sleeping, for if he had been awake, there would have been a fight.. Following a private farewell service in the North Room at Sagamore Hill, a simple funeral was held at Christ Episcopal Church in Oyster Bay. Vice President Thomas R. Marshall, Charles Evans Hughes, Warren Harding, Henry Cabot Lodge, and William Howard Taft were among the mourners. The snowcovered procession route to Youngs Memorial Cemetery was lined with spectators and a squad of mounted policemen who had ridden from New York City. Roosevelt was buried on a hillside overlooking Oyster Bay. Writer Part of the Works of Theodore Roosevelt Roosevelt was a prolific author, writing with passion on subjects ranging from foreign policy to the importance of the national park system. Roosevelt was also an avid reader of poetry. Poet Robert Frost said that Roosevelt was our kind. He quoted poetry to me. He knew poetry. As an editor of Outlook magazine, Roosevelt had weekly access to a large, educated national audience. In all, Roosevelt wrote about 18 books , including his autobiography, The Rough Riders , History of the Naval War of 1812 , and others on subjects such as ranching, explorations, and wildlife. His most ambitious book was the four volume narrative The Winning of the West , focused on the American frontier in the 18th and early 19th centuries. Roosevelt said that the American character indeed a new American race had emerged from the heroic wilderness hunters and Indian fighters, acting on the frontier with little government help.Richard Slotkin, Nostalgia and progress Theodore Roosevelts myth of the frontier. American Quarterly 335 pp 608 637. online Roosevelt also published an account of his 1909 10 African expedition entitled African Game Trails . In 1907, Roosevelt became embroiled in a widely publicized literary debate known as the nature fakers controversy. A few years earlier, naturalist John Burroughs had published an article entitled Real and Sham Natural History in the Atlantic Monthly , attacking popular writers of the day such as Ernest Thompson Seton, Charles G. D. Roberts, and William J. Long for their fantastical representations of wildlife. Roosevelt agreed with Burroughs criticisms, and published several essays of his own denouncing the booming genre of naturalistic animal stories as yellow journalism of the woods. It was the President himself who popularized the negative term nature faker to describe writers who depicted their animal characters with excessive anthropomorphism.. Character and beliefs Sagamore Hill, Roosevelts estate Roosevelt intensely disliked being called Teddy, and was quick to point out this fact to those who referred to him as such, though it would become widely used by newspapers during his political career. He attended church regularly. In 1907, concerning the motto In God We Trust on money, he wrote, It seems to me eminently unwise to cheapen such a motto by use on coins, just as it would be to cheapen it by use on postage stamps, or in advertisements. He was also a member of the Freemasons and Sons of the American Revolution.. Roosevelt had a lifelong interest in pursuing what he called, in an 1899 speech, The Strenuous Life. To this end, he exercised regularly and took up boxing, tennis, hiking, rowing, polo, and horseback riding. As governor of New York, he boxed with sparring partners several times each week, a practice he regularly continued as President until being hit so hard in the face he became blind in his left eye . Thereafter, he practiced judo, attaining a third degree brown belt he also continued his habit of skinnydipping in the Potomac River during the winter.. Roosevelt was an enthusiastic singlestick player and, according to Harpers Weekly , showed up at a White House reception with his arm bandaged after a bout with General Leonard Wood in 1905.. Roosevelt was an avid reader, reading tens of thousands of books, at a rate of several per day in multiple languages. Along with Thomas Jefferson, Roosevelt was the most wellread of all American presidents.. Political positions On taking office, Roosevelt reassured many conservatives, stating, the mechanism of modern business is so delicate that extreme care must be taken not to interfere with it in a spirit of rashness or ignorance. The following year, Roosevelt asserted the presidents independence from business interests by opposing the merger which created the Northern Securities Company, and many were surprised that any president, much less an unelected one, would challenge powerful banker J.P. Morgan. In his last two years as president, Roosevelt became increasingly distrustful of big business, despite its close ties to the Republican Party.Gary Murphy in Theodore Roosevelt, Presidential Power and the Regulation of the Market in Serge Ricard, ed. A companion to Theodore Roosevelt pp 15472. Roosevelt sought to replace the 19thcentury laissezfaire economic environment with a new economic model which included a larger regulatory role for the federal government. He believed that 19thcentury entrepreneurs had risked their fortunes on innovations and new businesses, and that these capitalists had been rightly rewarded. By contrast, he believed that 20thcentury capitalists risked little but nonetheless reaped huge and, given the lack of risk, unjust, economic rewards. Without a redistribution of wealth away from the upper class, Roosevelt feared that the country would turn to radicals or fall to revolution.Morris pp. 430431, 436 His Square Deal domestic program had three main goals conservation of natural resources, control of corporations, and consumer protection. The Square Deal evolved into his program of New Nationalism, which emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests and a need to more effectively control corporate creation and combination, and proposed a ban on corporate political contributions. Legacy Roosevelt in Pennsylvania on October 26, 1914 Historians credit Roosevelt for changing the nations political system by permanently placing the presidency at center stage and making character as important as the issues. His notable accomplishments include trust busting and conservationism. He is a hero to liberals for his proposals in 1907 12 that presaged the modern welfare state of the New Deal Era, and put the environment on the national agenda. Conservatives admire his big stick diplomacy and commitment to military values. Dalton says, Today he is heralded as the architect of the modern presidency, as a world leader who boldly reshaped the office to meet the needs of the new century and redefined Americas place in the world. However, liberals have criticized him for his interventionist and imperialist approach to nations he considered uncivilized. Conservatives reject his vision of the welfare state and emphasis on the superiority of government over private action. Historians typically rank Roosevelt among the top five presidents... Persona and masculinity 1910 cartoon shows Roosevelts multiple roles from 1899 to 1910 Dalton says Roosevelt is remembered as, one of the most picturesque personalities who has ever enlivened the landscape. His friend, historian Henry Adams, proclaimed Recent biographers have stressed Roosevelts personality. Cooper compared him with Woodrow Wilson, and discovered that both of them played the roles of warrior and priest. Dalton stressed Roosevelts strenuous life. Sarah Watts examined the desires of the Rough Rider in the White House. Brands calls Roosevelt the last romantic, arguing that his romantic concept of life emerged from his belief that physical bravery was the highest virtue and war the ultimate test of bravery. Roosevelt as the exemplar of American masculinity has become a major theme.D. G. Daniels, Theodore Roosevelt and Gender Roles Presidential Studies Quarterly 263 pp 648 665 As president, he repeatedly warned men that they were becoming too officebound, too complacent, too comfortable with physical ease and moral laxity, and were failing in their duties to propagate the race and exhibit masculine vigor.. French historian Serge Ricard says, the ebullient apostle of the Strenuous Life offers ideal material for a detailed psychohistorical analysis of aggressive manhood in the changing sociocultural environment of his era McKinley, Taft, or Wilson would perhaps inadequately serve that purpose.. He promoted competitive sports and the Boy Scouts of America, founded in 1910, as the way forward. Brands shows that heroic displays of bravery were essential to Roosevelts image and mission Memorials and cultural depictions Roosevelts face on Mount Rushmore Roosevelt was included with Presidents George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln at the Mount Rushmore Memorial, designed in 1927 with the approval of Republican President Calvin Coolidge. For his gallantry at San Juan Hill, Roosevelts commanders recommended him for the Medal of Honor. In the late 1990s, Roosevelts supporters again recommended the award. On January 16, 2001, President Bill Clinton awarded Theodore Roosevelt the Medal of Honor posthumously for his charge on San Juan Hill, Cuba, during the Spanish American War. The United States Navy named two ships for Roosevelt the , a submarine that was in commission from 1961 to 1982, and the , an aircraft carrier that has been on active duty in the Atlantic Fleet since 1986. On November 18, 1956, the United States Postal Service released a 6 Liberty Issue postage stamp honoring Roosevelt. A 32 stamp was issued on February 3, 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series. In 2008, Columbia Law School awarded a law degree to Roosevelt, posthumously making him a member of the class of 1882. Roosevelts Speak Softly and Carry a Big Stick ideology is still quoted by politicians and columnists in different countries not only in English, but also in translations to various other languages. Another lasting, popular legacy of Roosevelt is the stuffed toy bears teddy bears named after him following an incident on a hunting trip in Mississippi in 1902. Roosevelt has been portrayed in films and television series such as Brighty of the Grand Canyon , The Wind and the Lion , Rough Riders , My Friend Flicka , and Law of the Plainsman. Robin Williams portrayed Roosevelt in the form of a wax mannequin that comes to life in Night at the Museum and its sequels Night at the Museum Battle of the Smithsonian and Night at the Museum Secret of the Tomb . In 2017, it was announced that Leonardo DiCaprio will portray Roosevelt in a biopic to be directed by Martin Scorsese. Media Theodore Roosevelt was one of the first presidents whose voice was recorded for posterity. Several of his recorded speeches survive.. A 4.6minute voice recording, which preserves Roosevelts lower timbre ranges particularly well for its time, is among those available from the Michigan State University libraries . The audio clip sponsored by the Authentic History Center includes his defense of the Progressive Party in 1912, wherein he proclaims it the party of the people in contrast with the other major parties. Roosevelt goes for a ride in Arch Hoxseys plane in October 1910 See also Notes References Bibliography Full biographies . . . , 105 pp, very short biography by leading scholar. . . Pulitzer prize for Volume 1. . , only volume published, to age 28. . . Personality and activities . . Provides a lesson plan on TR as the historical figure who most exemplifies the quality of masculinity. . Chronicles the events of TRs presidency during the summers of his two terms. . The presidents use of publicity, rhetoric and force of personality. his deadly 1913 14 trip to the Amazon. , best seller to 1886. , to 1884. . 494 pp. , examines TR and his family during the World War I period. . , 240 pp. TR in Africa Europe, 1909 10 . 289 pp. , 337 pp TRs political thought and its significance for republican selfgovernment. Domestic policies online review another online review Cutright, P.R. Theodore Roosevelt The making of a Modern Conservationist . , standard history of his domestic and foreign policy as president. Bakari, Mohamed ElKamel. Mapping the Anthropocentricecocentric Dualism in the History of American Presidency The Good, the Bad, and the Ambivalent. Journal of Studies in Social Sciences 14, no. 2 . . . Redekop, Benjamin. . Embodying the Story The Conservation Leadership of Theodore Roosevelt. Leadership DOI10.11771742715014546875 online . . Politics . How TR did politics. , 323 pp. . . . . . 361 pp. . . Focus on 1912 . . Attacks TR policies from conservativelibertarian perspective. Foreign and military policies . . . 328 pp. . . . On TRs controversial reforms. . . . . . 196 pp. Historiography Dalton, Kathleen. Changing interpretations of Theodore Roosevelt and the Progressive era. in Christopher M. Nichols and Nancy C. Unger, eds A Companion to the Gilded Age and Progressive Era 296 307. Grantham, Dewey W., Jr. Theodore Roosevelt in American Historical Writing, 1945 1960. MidAmerica 431 3 35. Ricard, Serge. The State of Theodore Roosevelt Studies HDiplo Essay No. 116 24 October 2014 online , excerpt and text search, 28 new essays by scholars focus on historiography. online Tilchin, William, The Rising Star of Theodore Roosevelts Diplomacy Major Studies from Beale to the Present. Theodore Roosevelt Association Journal 153 2 24. Primary sources Kohn, Edward P., ed. A Most Glorious Ride The Diaries of Theodore Roosevelt, 1877 1886 , 284 pp. vol 2 . , 20 vol. 18,000 pages containing most of TRs speeches, books and essays, but not his letters a CDROM edition is available some of TRs books are available online through Project Bartleby , Roosevelts opinions on many issues online version at Theodore Roosevelt. , 8 vols. Very large. . . . . . . External links Official White House biography Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Theodore Roosevelt Association Libraries and collections Theodore Roosevelt Center at Dickinson State University Theodore Roosevelt Collection, at the Houghton Library, Harvard University Julian L. Street Papers on Theodore Roosevelt, at the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University Doris A. and Lawrence H. Budner Collection on Theodore Roosevelt at the DeGolyer Library, Southern Methodist University Theodore Roosevelts journalism at The Archive of American Journalism Theodore Roosevelt American Museum of Natural History Media Life Portrait of Theodore Roosevelt, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , September 3, 1999 Writings of Theodore Roosevelt from CSPANs American Writers A Journey Through History Other Almanac of Theodore Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt A Resource Guide Library of Congress Theodore Roosevelt, Nobel Peace Prize Category1858 births Category1919 deaths Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury American writers Category19thcentury American historians Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury American writers CategoryAmerican autobiographers CategoryAmerican conservationists CategoryAmerican essayists CategoryAmerican explorers CategoryAmerican hunters CategoryAmerican fishers CategoryAmerican male judoka CategoryAmerican male writers CategoryAmerican military personnel of the Spanish American War CategoryAmerican naval historians CategoryAmerican Nobel laureates CategoryAmerican political writers CategoryAmerican shooting survivors CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryBohemian Club members CategoryBulloch family CategoryBurials in New York CategoryColumbia Law School alumni CategoryCommissioners of the New York City Police Department CategoryCowboys CategoryExplorers of Amazonia CategoryFreemen of the City of London CategoryGovernors of New York CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHarvard University alumni CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryMembers of the American Philosophical Society CategoryMembers of the New York State Assembly CategoryMilitary personnel from New York City CategoryNational Rifle Association people CategoryNew York Progressives CategoryNew York Republicans CategoryNobel Peace Prize laureates CategoryPeople associated with the American Museum of Natural History CategoryPeople associated with the Boy Scouts of America CategoryPeople from Oyster Bay, New York CategoryPhi Beta Kappa members CategoryPoliticians from New York City CategoryPresidents of the American Historical Association CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryProgressive Era in the United States CategoryRanchers from North Dakota CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party vice presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party state governors of the United States CategoryRepublican Party Vice Presidents of the United States Theodore CategoryRough Riders CategorySchuyler family CategorySons of the American Revolution CategorySpanish American War recipients of the Medal of Honor CategoryUnited States Army Medal of Honor recipients CategoryUnited States Army officers CategoryUnited States Assistant Secretaries of the Navy CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1904 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1912 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1916 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1900 CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryWriters from New York CategoryUnited States politicians who were awarded the Medal of Honor ndsTheodoreRoosevelt
Ulysses S. Grant was a prominent United States Army general during the American Civil War and Commanding General at the conclusion of that war. He was elected as the 18th President of the United States in 1868, serving from 1869 to 1877. As Commanding General, Grant worked closely with President Abraham Lincoln to lead the Union Army to victory over the Confederacy. After Lincolns assassination, Grants assignment in implementing Reconstruction often put him at odds with President Andrew Johnson, Lincolns successor. Twice elected president, Grant led the Republicans in their effort to remove the vestiges of Confederate nationalism and slavery, protect AfricanAmerican citizenship, and support economic prosperity. Grants presidency has often been criticized for its scandals and for his failure to alleviate the economic depression following the Panic of 1873, but modern scholarship regards him as a president who performed a difficult job with some merit, and took strong action on civil rights for African Americans. Grant graduated in 1843 from the United States Military Academy at West Point and served in the Mexican American War. After the war, he married Julia Dent in 1848, and together they had four children. Grant retired from the Army in 1854 and struggled financially in civilian life. When the Civil War began in 1861, he rejoined the U.S. Army and quickly rose through the ranks. In 1862, Grant took control of Kentucky and most of Tennessee, and led Union forces to victory in the Battle of Shiloh, earning a reputation as an aggressive commander. In July 1863, after a series of coordinated battles, Grant defeated Confederate armies and seized Vicksburg, giving the Union control of the Mississippi River and dividing the Confederacy in two. After Grants victories in the Chattanooga Campaign, Lincoln promoted him to lieutenant general and Commanding General of the Army in March 1864. Grant confronted Robert E. Lee in a series of bloody battles, trapping Lees army in their defense of Richmond. Grant coordinated a series of devastating campaigns in other theaters, as well. In April 1865, Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox, effectively ending the war. Historians have hailed Grants military genius, and his strategies are featured in military history textbooks, but a minority contend that he won by brute force rather than superior strategy. With the close of the Civil War, Grant led the armys supervision of Reconstruction in the former Confederate states. Elected president in 1868, he stabilized the nation during that turbulent period, prosecuted the Ku Klux Klan, briefly used the military to enforce laws in the south and created the Department of Justice while bolstering the Republican Party in the South. Grant also employed the Army to supervise new elections in the South with universal male suffrage. When Blacks in the South came under violent attack from whites, Grant tried to protect them by signing three civil rights acts into law. In 1871, Grant created the first Civil Service Commission, to appease reformers. The Democrats and Liberal Republicans united behind Grants opponent in the presidential election of 1872, but Grant was reelected by a strong margin. In his second term, the Republican coalitions in the South splintered and were defeated as a faction of white Southern Redeemers regained control of Southern state governments using violence, voter fraud, and racist appeal. Although personally regarded as honest, Grant faced charges of corruption in his administration more than any 19th Century president. Grants Peace Policy with Native Americans was a bold departure, but historians agree that, as with Reconstruction, it ended in failure. In foreign policy, Grant sought to increase trade and influence while remaining at peace with the world. With Secretary of State Hamilton Fish, he successfully resolved the Alabama claims through the Treaty of Washington with Great Britain. Grant and Fish negotiated a peaceful resolution with Spain over the Virginius Affair. Congress rejected Grants initiative to annex the Dominican Republic, creating a rift among Republicans. His administration implemented a gold standard and sought to strengthen the dollar. Grants immediate response to the Panic of 1873 failed to halt a severe industrial depression that produced high unemployment, deflation, and bankruptcies. When Grant left office in 1877, he embarked on a twoyear world tour that captured favorable global attention for him and the United States. In 1880, Grant was unsuccessful in obtaining the Republican presidential nomination for a third term. Facing severe investment reversals and dying of throat cancer, he wrote his memoirs, which proved to be a major critical and financial success. His death in 1885 prompted an outpouring in support of national unity. Historical assessments of Grants legacy have varied considerably over the years. His popular reputation focuses on his drinking, which historians agree did not adversely affect his military campaigns. Early historical evaluations were mostly negative about Grants presidency. Scholars continue to rank his presidency below the average, but modern appreciation for his support for civil rights has helped improve his standing. Early life and education Grants birthplace, Point Pleasant, Ohio Hiram Ulysses Grant was born in Point Pleasant, Ohio, on April 27, 1822, to Jesse Root Grant, a tanner and merchant, and Hannah Grant . His ancestors Matthew and Priscilla Grant arrived aboard the Mary and John at Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630. Grants greatgrandfather fought in the French and Indian War, and his grandfather, Noah, served in the American Revolution at Bunker Hill. Afterward, Noah settled in Pennsylvania and married Rachel Kelley, the daughter of an Irish pioneer. Their son Jesse was a Whig Party supporter and abolitionist. Jesse Grant moved to Point Pleasant in 1820 and found work as a foreman in a tannery. He soon met his future wife, Hannah, and the two were married on June 24, 1821. Ten months later Hannah gave birth to their first child, a son. At a family gathering several weeks later the boys name, Ulysses, was drawn from ballots placed in a hat. Wanting to honor his fatherinlaw, Jesse declared the boy to be Hiram Ulysses, though he would always refer to him as Ulysses . In 1823, the family moved to the village of Georgetown, Ohio, where five more siblings were born Simpson, Clara, Orvil, Jennie, and Mary. At the age of five, young Grant began his formal education, starting at a subscription school and later was enrolled in two private schools. In the winter of 1836 1837, Grant was a student at Maysville Seminary, and in the autumn of 1838 he attended John Rankins academy. In his youth, Grant developed an unusual ability to ride, work with, and control horses. Expressing a strong dislike for the tannery, Grants father instead put this ability to use giving Ulysses work driving wagon loads of supplies and transporting people. Unlike his siblings, Grant was not forced to attend church by his Methodist parents. For the rest of his life, he prayed privately and never officially joined any denomination. To others, including late in life, his own son, Grant appeared to be an agnostic. He inherited some of Hannahs Methodist piety and quiet nature while adopting his fathers Whig political inclinations. Early military career and personal life Second lieutenant Grant in full dress uniform in 1843 West Point and first assignment Grants father wrote to Representative Thomas L. Hamer requesting that he nominate Ulysses to the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York. When a spot opened in March 1839, Hamer nominated the 16yearold Grant. He mistakenly wrote down Ulysses S. Grant, which became Grants adopted name. Initially reluctant because of concerns about his academic ability, Grant entered the academy on July 1, 1839, as a cadet and trained there for four years. On Sundays, cadets were required to march to and attend services at the academys church, a requirement that Grant disliked. His nickname became Sam among army colleagues since the initials U.S. also stood for Uncle Sam. As he later recalled it, a military life had no charms for me. Grant developed a reputation as an expert horseman and set an equestrian highjump record that stood for almost 25 years. Seeking relief from military routine, he also studied under Romantic artist Robert Walter Weir and produced nine surviving artworks. He spent more time reading books from the library than his academic texts, frequently reading works by James Fenimore Cooper and others. But within a year Grant reexamined his desire to leave the academy and later wrote, on the whole I like this place very much. Quiet by nature, Grant established a few intimate friends among fellow cadets, including Frederick Tracy Dent and James Longstreet. He was inspired both by the Commandant, Captain Charles F. Smith, and by General Winfield Scott, who visited the academy to review the cadets. Grant later wrote of the military life, there is much to dislike, but more to like. Grant graduated on July 1, 1843, ranked 21st in a class of 39, and was promoted to the rank brevet second lieutenant. Glad to leave the academy, he planned to resign his commission after his fouryear term of duty. Despite his excellent horsemanship, he was not assigned to the cavalry, but to the 4th Infantry Regiment. He served as regimental quartermaster, managing supplies and equipment. Grants first assignment took him to the Jefferson Barracks near St. Louis, Missouri. Commanded by Colonel Stephen W. Kearny, the barracks was the nations largest military base in the west. Grant was happy with his new commander, but looked forward to the end of his military service and a possible teaching career. He spent some of his time in Missouri visiting Dents family and became engaged to Dents sister, Julia, in 1844. Four years later on August 22, 1848, they were married at Julias home in St. Louis. Grants abolitionist father Jesse, who disapproved of the Dents owning slaves, refused to attend their wedding, which took place without either of Grants parents. Grant was flanked by three fellow West Point graduates, all dressed in their blue uniforms, including Longstreet, Julias cousin. At the end of the month, Julia was nevertheless warmly received by Grants family in Bethel, Ohio. They had four children Frederick, Ulysses Jr. , Ellen , and Jesse. After the wedding, Grant obtained a twomonth extension to his leave and returned to St. Louis when he decided, with a wife to support, that he would remain in the army. Mexican American War Monterrey street fighting, 1846 After rising tensions with Mexico following the United States annexation of Texas, war broke out in 1846. During the conflict, Grant distinguished himself as a daring and competent soldier. Before the war, President John Tyler had ordered Grants unit to Louisiana as part of the Army of Observation under Major General Zachary Taylor. In September 1846, Tylers successor, James K. Polk, unable to provoke Mexico into war at Corpus Christi, Texas, ordered Taylor to march 150 miles south to the Rio Grande. Marching south to Fort Texas, to prevent a Mexican siege, Grant experienced combat for the first time on May 8, 1846, at the Battle of Palo Alto. While serving as regimental quartermaster, Grant yearned for a combat role when finally allowed, he led a cavalry charge at the Battle of Resaca de la Palma, demonstrating his equestrian ability at Monterrey by carrying a dispatch past snipers while hanging off the side of his horse, keeping the animal between him and the enemy. Before leaving the city he stopped at a house occupied by wounded Americans, giving them assurance he would send for help. Polk, wary of Taylors growing popularity, divided his forces, sending some troops to form a new army under Major General Winfield Scott. Traveling by sea, Scotts army landed at Veracruz and advanced toward Mexico City. The army met the Mexican forces at the battles of Molino del Rey and Chapultepec outside Mexico City. For his bravery at Molino del Rey, Grant was brevetted first lieutenant. At San Cosm, men under Grants direction dragged a disassembled howitzer into a church steeple, reassembled it, and bombarded nearby Mexican troops. His bravery and initiative earned him his second brevet promotion to captain. On September 14, 1847, Scotts army marched into the city Mexico ceded the vast territory, including California, to the U.S. on February 2, 1848. During the war, Grant studied the tactics and strategies of Scott and Taylor, later writing in his memoirs that this is how he learned about military leadership. In retrospect, he identified his leadership style with Taylors. However, Grant also wrote that the Mexican War was wrong and the territorial gains were designed to expand slavery, stating, I was bitterly opposed to the measure...and to this day, regard the war, which resulted, as one of the most unjust ever waged by a stronger against a weaker nation. He opined that the Civil War was punishment on the nation for its aggression in Mexico. During the war, Grant discovered his moral courage and began to consider a career in the army. Pacific duty and resignation Grant believed Pacific Northwest Indians were harmless. Chinook Indian Plankhouse 1850s . Grants first postwar assignments took him and Julia to Detroit and then to Sackets Harbor, New York. In 1852, Grant was ordered to the Pacific Northwest, traveling the New YorkPanama oceanic route. Julia, eight months pregnant with Ulysses Jr., did not accompany him. In Panama, an outbreak of cholera among his fellow travelers caused 150 fatalities Grant arranged makeshift transportation and hospital facilities and helped nurse the sick. In August, Grant arrived in San Francisco, and his next assignment sent him north to Vancouver Barracks in the Oregon Territory . To supplement a military salary which was inadequate to support his family, Grant speculated and failed at several business ventures, confirming his fathers belief that he had no head for business. Grant assured Julia in a letter that local Native Americans were harmless, while he developed an empathy for the plight of Indians from the unjust treatment by white men. Promoted to captain on August 5, 1853, Grant was assigned to command Company F, 4th Infantry, at the newly constructed Fort Humboldt in California. He arrived at the fort on January 5, 1854, and reported to its commander Lieutenant Colonel Robert C. Buchanan. Grant was bored and depressed about being separated from his wife Julia, and he began to drink. An officer who roomed with Grant said he fell too much under the influence of liquor to properly perform his duties. Colonel Buchanan demanded he should resign. Historian Jean Edward Smith says, The story rings true. When Grant was reprimanded by Buchanan for one drinking episode, Grant told Buchanan if he did not reform he would resign. One Sunday, Grant was rumored to have been found at his companys paytable influenced by drink. Keeping his pledge to Buchanan, Grant resigned, effective July 31, 1854, without explanation. Buchanan endorsed Grants letter of resignation but did not submit any report that verified the incident. Grant was neither arrested nor faced courtmartial, while the War Department stated, Nothing stands against his good name. Grant said years later, the vice of intemperance had not a little to do with my decision to resign. With no means of support, Grant returned to St. Louis and reunited with his family, uncertain about his future. Civilian struggles and politics Hardscrabble, the farm home Grant built in Missouri for his family At age 32, while living in Covington, Kentucky with no civilian vocation, Grant struggled through seven financially lean years. His father offered him a place in the Galena, Illinois, branch of the familys leather business on condition that Julia and the children stay with her parents in Missouri or with the Grants in Kentucky. Ulysses and Julia opposed another separation and declined the offer. In 1855, Grant farmed on his brotherinlaws property near St. Louis, using slaves owned by Julias father. The farm was not successful and to earn money he sold firewood on St. Louis street corners. Earning only 50 a month, wearing his faded army jacket, an unkempt Grant desperately looked for work. The next year, the Grants moved to land on Julias fathers farm, and built a home Grant called Hardscrabble. Julia disliked the rustic house, which she described as an unattractive cabin. The Panic of 1857 devastated farmers, including Grant, who reaching a low ebb financially, pawned his gold watch to pay for Christmas. In 1858, Grant rented out Hardscrabble and moved his family to Julias fathers 850acre estate, a plantation that employed slave labor. That fall, after a bout of malaria, Grant retired from farming. The same year, Grant acquired a slave from his fatherinlaw, a thirtyfiveyearold man named William Jones. In March 1859, Grant freed William, worth about 1,500, instead of selling him at a time when he desperately needed money. Grant moved to St. Louis, taking on a partnership with Julias cousin Harry Boggs working in real estate business as a bill collector, again without success, and at Julias recommendation dissolved his partnership. In August, Grant applied for a position as county engineer, believing his education qualified him for the job. His application came with thirtyfive notable recommendations, but Grant correctly assumed the position would be given on the basis of political affiliation and was passed over as he was believed to share his fatherinlaws Democratic sentiments. In April 1860, Grant and his family moved north to Galena, accepting a position in his fathers leather goods business run by his younger brothers Simpson and Orvil. In a few months, Ulysses paid off the debts he acquired in Missouri. Ulysses and family attended the local Methodist church and he soon established himself as a reputable citizen of Galena. In the 1856 presidential election, Grant cast his first presidential vote for Democrat James Buchanan, later saying he was really voting against Republican John C. Frmont over concern that his antislavery position would lead to southern secession and war. Although Grant was not an abolitionist, neither was he considered a slavery man, and could not bring himself to force slaves to do work. By the 1860 election, Grant was openly Democratic, favoring Democrat Stephen A. Douglas over Abraham Lincoln, and Lincoln over the Southern Democrat, John C. Breckinridge. Lacking the residency requirements in Illinois at the time, he could not vote. After Lincoln was elected, Southern states seceded from the Union forming a Confederacy, seizing federal forts and institutions. Civil War Brig. Gen. Grant in 1861 Early commands On April 12, 1861, the American Civil War began as Confederate troops attacked Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina. Grant wrote to his father in a letter of April 21 that we have a government and laws and a flag, and they must all be sustained. There are but two parties now, Traitors and Patriots ... Two days after the attack, Lincoln called for 75,000 volunteers and a mass meeting was held in Galena to assess the crisis and encourage recruitment. Before the attack, Grant had not reacted strongly to Southern secession. The news came as a shock in Galena, and Grant shared his neighbors concern about the war. The captain of the local militia nominated Grant, the only man in town with professional military training, to lead the recruitment effort. A speech by his fathers attorney, John Aaron Rawlins, stirred Grants patriotism. Rawlins later became Grants aidedecamp and close friend during the war. Grant recalled with satisfaction that after that first recruitment meeting in Galena, I never went into our leather store again. Grant quickly raised and recruited a company of volunteers, and was given the captaincy, accompanying them to Springfield. He perceived that the war would be fought mostly by volunteers, not career soldiers. Governor Richard Yates offered Grant a militia commission to recruit and train volunteer units, which he accepted, but still wanted a field command. He made several efforts through his professional contacts. Major General George B. McClellan refused to see him, remembering the day in Oregon in 1853 when he saw Grant on a drunken spree. With the aid of his advocate, Representative Elihu B. Washburne of Illinois, Grant was promoted to Colonel on June 14 and charged with disciplining the unruly 21st Illinois Volunteer Infantry Regiment. Transferred to northern Missouri, Grant was promoted to Brigadier General, backdated to May 17, 1861. Control of the Mississippi River was the key to victory in the Western theater. Believing Grant was a general of dogged persistence and iron will, Major General John C. Frmont assigned Grant to command troops on the Mississippi at Cairo, Illinois at the end of August . Frmont dismissed rumors of Grants drunkenness years earlier in the regular army, saying there was something about Grants manner that was sufficient to counteract the influence of what they said. Cairo was a bustling Union military and naval base that was to be used to launch a joint campaign down the Mississippi, Tennessee, and Cumberland Rivers. After the Confederates moved into western Kentucky, with designs on Southern Illinois, Grant, under Frmonts authority, advanced on Paducah, Kentucky, taking it without a fight, and set up a supply station. Having understood the importance to Lincoln in keeping Kentucky in the Union, Grant assured its citizens, I have come among you not as your enemy, but as your friend. On November 1, Frmont ordered Grant to make demonstrations against the Confederates on both sides of the Mississippi, but prohibited him from attacking the enemy. Belmont, Forts Henry and Donelson On November 1, 1861, Frmont ordered Grant to embark south with his troops from Cairo to attack Confederate soldiers encamped in Belmont, Missouri. Grant, along with Brigadier General John A. McClernand, landed 2,500 men at Hunters Point, two miles north of the Confederate base outside Belmont. They took the camp, but the reinforced Confederates under Brigadier Generals Frank Cheatham and Gideon J. Pillow forced a chaotic Union retreat. At first, Grant had wanted to destroy Confederate strongholds at both Belmont, Missouri and Columbus, Kentucky, but Frmont had not given Grant enough troops to do the job. All Grants men could do was disrupt the Confederates and fight their way back to their Union boats. They escaped back to Cairo under fire from the heavily fortified stronghold at Columbus. A tactical defeat, the battle gave Grants volunteers confidence and experience. Confederate forces still at Columbus blocked the Union armys access to the lower Mississippi. Grant, and General James B. McPherson, came up with a plan to bypass Columbus and with a force of 25,000 troops, move against Fort Henry on the Tennessee River and then ten miles east to Fort Donelson on the Cumberland River, with the aid of gunboats, opening both rivers and allowing the Union access further south. Grant presented his plan to Henry Halleck, his new commander under the newly created Department of Missouri. Halleck was considering the same strategy, but rebuffed Grant, believing he needed twice the number of troops. However, after Halleck telegraphed and consulted McClellan about the plan, he finally agreed on condition that the attack be conducted in close cooperation with navy Flag Officer, Andrew H. Foote. After Footes gunboats had silenced most of the guns at the fort, Grants troops moved in and easily captured Fort Henry on February 6, 1862. Grant then ordered an immediate assault on nearby Fort Donelson, under the command of John B. Floyd, which dominated the Cumberland River. Unlike Fort Henry, Grant was now going up against a force equal to his. Unaware of the garrisons strength, Grants forces approached the scene overconfident from their easy victory at Fort Henry. Grant, McClernand, and Smith positioned their divisions around the fort. The next day McClernand and Smith launched probing attacks on what they figured were weak spots in the Confederate line, only to retreat with heavy losses. On February 14, Footes gunboats arrived and began bombarding the fort, only to be repulsed by the heavy guns at the fort. Foote himself was wounded. Thus far it was a victory for the Confederates, but soon Union reinforcements arrived, giving Grant a total force of over 40,000 men. When Foote regained control of the river, Grant resumed his attack, but a standoff remained. That evening Confederate commander Floyd called a council of war, unsure of his next action. Grant received a dispatch from Foote, requesting that they meet. Grant mounted a horse and rode seven miles over freezing roads and trenches, reaching Smiths division, instructing him to prepare for the next assault, and rode on and met up with McClernand and Wallace. After exchanging reports he met up with Foote. After they conferred, Foote resumed his bombardment, which signaled the other generals to resume the attack. After a day of battle, Fort Donelson submitted to Grants demand for unconditional and immediate surrender, and Floyd struck his flag. Grant telegraphed Halleck, informing him that Fort Donelson had fallen. Grant had won the first major victory for the Union, capturing Floyds entire rebel army of more than 12,000. Halleck was nevertheless angry that Grant had acted without his authorization and complained to McClellan, accusing Grant of neglect and inefficiency. On March 3, Halleck sent a telegram to Washington complaining that he had no communication with Grant for a week. Three days later, Halleck followed up with a postscript claiming word has just reached me that...Grant has resumed his bad habits . Lincoln, regardless, promoted Grant to major general of volunteers while the Northern press treated Grant as a hero. Playing off his initials, they took to calling him Unconditional Surrender Grant. Shiloh and aftermath As the great numbers of troops from both armies gathered, it was widely assumed in the North that this would be the battle to end the war. Grant, reinstated by Halleck at Lincolns and Stantons urging, left Fort Henry and traveled by boat up the Tennessee River to rejoin his army with orders to advance with the Army of the Tennessee into Tennessee. Grants main Union army was located at Pittsburg Landing, while 40,000 Confederate troops converged at Corinth. Brigadier General William Tecumseh Sherman assured Grant that his green troops were ready for an attack. Grant agreed and wired Halleck with their assessment. Grant, whose forces numbered 45,000, wanted to attack the Confederates at Corinth, but Halleck ordered him not to attack until Major General Don Carlos Buell arrived with his division of 25,000. Meanwhile, Grant prepared for an attack on the Confederate army of roughly equal strength. Instead of preparing defensive fortifications between the Tennessee River and Owl Creek, and clearing fields of fire, they spent most of their time drilling the largely inexperienced troops while Sherman dismissed reports of nearby Confederates. Union inaction created the opportunity for the Confederates to attack first before Buell arrived. On the morning of April 6, 1862, Grants troops were taken by surprise when the Confederates, led by Generals Albert Sidney Johnston and P.G.T. Beauregard, struck first like an Alpine avalanche near Shiloh church, attacking five divisions of Grants army and forcing a confused retreat toward the Tennessee River. Johnston was wounded and died during the engagement and command fell upon Beauregard. One Union line held the Confederate attack off for several hours at a place later called the Hornets Nest, giving Grant time to assemble artillery and 20,000 troops near Pittsburg Landing. The Confederates finally broke through the Hornets Nest to capture a Union division, but Grants Last Line held Pittsburg Landing, while the exhausted Confederates, lacking reinforcements, halted their advance. That evening, heavy rain set in while Grant and his staff took cover and huddled around a fire. When asked by McPherson if he was going to retreat, Grant replied, Retreat No. I propose to attack them at daylight and whip them. Bolstered by 18,000 fresh troops from the divisions of Major Generals Buell and Lew Wallace, Grant counterattacked at dawn the next day and regained the field, forcing the disorganized and demoralized rebels to retreat back to Corinth while thousands deserted. Halleck ordered Grant not to advance more than one day from Pittsburg Landing, stopping the pursuit of the Confederate Army. Although Grant had won the battle the situation was little changed, with the Union in possession of Pittsburg Landing and the Confederates once again holed up in Corinth. Grant, now realizing that the South was determined to fight and that the war would not be won with one battle, would later write, Then, indeed, I gave up all idea of saving the Union except by complete conquest. Shiloh was the costliest battle in American history to that point and the staggering 23,746 total casualties stunned the nation. Briefly hailed a hero for routing the Confederates, Grant was soon mired in controversy. The Northern press castigated Grant for shockingly high casualties, and accused him of drunkenness during the battle, contrary to the accounts of officers and others with him at the time. However, Grants victory at Shiloh ended any chance for the Confederates to prevail in the Mississippi valley or regain its strategic advantage in the West. Halleck arrived from St. Louis on April 11, took command, and assembled a combined army of about 120,000 men. On April 29, he relieved Grant of field command and replaced him with Major General George Henry Thomas. Halleck slowly marched his army to take Corinth, entrenching each night. Meanwhile, Beauregard pretended to be reinforcing, sent deserters to the Union Army with that story, and moved his army out during the night, to Hallecks surprise when he finally arrived at Corinth on May 30. Discouraged, Grant considered resigning but Sherman convinced him to stay. Lincoln dismissed Grants critics, saying I cant spare this man he fights. Halleck divided his combined army and reinstated Grant as field commander of the Army of the Tennessee on July 11. On September 19, Grants army defeated Confederates at the Battle of Iuka, then successfully defended Corinth, inflicting heavy casualties. On October 25, Grant assumed command of the District of the Tennessee. In November, after Lincolns preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, Grant ordered units under his command to incorporate former slaves into the Union Army, giving them clothes, shelter and wages for their services. Vicksburg campaign Grants gamble Porters gunboats running the Confederate gauntlet at Vicksburg The Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg, Mississippi blocked the way for complete Union control of the Mississippi River, making its capture vital for the Union War effort. Grants Army held western Tennessee with almost 40,000 troops available to fight. Grant was aggravated to learn that Lincoln authorized McClernand to raise a separate army for the purpose. Halleck ordered McClernand to Memphis, and placed him and his troops under Grants authority. After Grants army captured Holly Springs Grant planned to attack Vicksburgs front overland while Sherman would attack the fortress from the rear on the Mississippi River. However, Confederate cavalry raids on December 11 and 20 broke Union communications and recaptured Holly Springs, preventing Grants and Shermans armies from connecting. On December 29, a Confederate army led by Lieutenant General John C. Pemberton repulsed Shermans direct approach ascending the bluffs to Vicksburg at Chickasaw Bayou. McClernand reached Shermans army, assumed command, and independently of Grant led a campaign that captured Confederate Fort Hindman. During this time Grant incorporated fleeing African American slaves into the Union Army giving them protection and paid employment. Along with his military responsibilities in the months following Grants return to command, he was concerned over an expanding illicit cotton trade in his district. He believed the trade undermined the Union war effort, funded the Confederacy, and prolonged the war, while Union soldiers died in the fields. On December 17, he issued General Order No. 11, expelling Jews, as a class, from the district, saying that Jewish merchants were violating trade regulations. Writing in 2012, historian Jonathan D. Sarna said Grant issued the most notorious antiJewish official order in American history. Historians opinions vary on Grants motives for issuing the order. Jewish leaders complained to Lincoln while the Northern press criticized Grant. Lincoln demanded the order be revoked and Grant rescinded it within three weeks. When interviewed years after the war, in response to accusations of his General Order being antiJewish, Grant explained During war times these nice distinctions were disregarded, we had no time to handle things with kid gloves. The Battle of Jackson, fought on May 14, 1863, was part of the Vicksburg Campaign. On January 29, 1863, Grant assumed overall command and attempted to advance his army through waterlogged terrain to bypass Vicksburgs guns which was ineffective. In the process, however, the green Union soldiers were gaining experience. On April 16, Grant ordered Admiral David Dixon Porters gunboats south under fire from the Vicksburg batteries to meet up with his troops who had marched south down the west side of the Mississippi River. Grant ordered diversionary battles, confusing Pemberton and allowing Grants army to move east across the Mississippi, landing troops at Bruinsburg. Grants army captured Jackson, the state capital. Advancing his army to Vicksburg, Grant defeated Pembertons army at the Battle of Champion Hill on May 16, forcing their retreat into Vicksburg. After Grants men assaulted the entrenchments twice, suffering severe losses, they settled in for a siege lasting seven weeks. During quiet periods of the campaign Grant would take to drinking on occasion. Pemberton surrendered Vicksburg to Grant on July 4, 1863. Vicksburgs fall gave Union forces control of the Mississippi River and split the Confederacy. By that time, Grants political sympathies fully coincided with the Radical Republicans aggressive prosecution of the war and emancipation of the slaves. The success at Vicksburg was a morale boost for the Union war effort. The personal rivalry between McClernand and Grant continued after Vicksburg until Grant removed McClernand from command when he contravened Grant by publishing an order without permission. When Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton suggested Grant be brought back east to run the Army of the Potomac, Grant demurred, writing that he knew the geography and resources of the West better and he did not want to upset the chain of command in the East. Chattanooga and promotion Union troops swarm Missionary Ridge and defeat Braggs army. Lincoln promoted Grant to major general in the regular army and assigned him command of the newly formed Division of the Mississippi on October 16, 1863, including the Armies of the Ohio, Tennessee, and Cumberland. After the Battle of Chickamauga, the Army of the Cumberland retreated into Chattanooga, where they were trapped. When informed of the situation, Grant put Major General George H. Thomas in charge of the rescue. Taking command, Grant arrived in Chattanooga by horseback, with plans to resupply the city and break the siege. Lincoln also sent Major General Joseph Hooker and two divisions of the Army of the Potomac to assist. Union forces captured Browns Ferry and opened a supply line to Bridgeport. On November 23, Grant organized three armies to attack at Missionary Ridge and Lookout Mountain. Two days later, Hookers forces took Lookout Mountain. Grant ordered Thomas and the Army of the Cumberland to advance when Shermans army failed to take Missionary Ridge from the northeast. The Army of the Cumberland, led by Major General Philip Sheridan and Brigadier General Thomas J. Wood, charged uphill and captured the Confederate entrenchments at the top, forcing the rebels into retreat. The decisive battle gave the Union control of Tennessee and opened Georgia, the Confederate heartland, to Union invasion. On March 2, 1864, Lincoln promoted Grant to lieutenant general, giving him command of all Union Armies, answering only to the President. Grant assigned Sherman the Division of the Mississippi and traveled to Washington to meet with Lincoln to devise a strategy of total war against the Confederacy. Grant established his headquarters with General George Meades Army of the Potomac in Culpeper, Virginia. Grant developed an overall master plan of five coordinated Union offensives, attacking the rebel armies at the same time to keep the Confederates from shifting reinforcements within their interior lines. Sherman was to pursue Joseph E. Johnstons Army of Tennessee, while Meade would lead the Army of the Potomac, with Grant in the field, to attack and destroy Robert E. Lees Army of Northern Virginia. Major General Benjamin Butler was to advance towards Richmond from the south, up the James River, while a joint armynavy operation was to be launched against Mobile, Alabama. If Lee was forced south as expected, Grant would join forces with Butlers armies and be fed supplies from the James. Major General Franz Sigel was to capture the railroad line at Lynchburg, move east, and attack from the Blue Ridge Mountains. Grant knew that Lee had limited manpower and that a war of attrition fought on a battlefield without entrenchments would lead to Lees defeat. Grant was now riding a rising tide of popularity, and there was talk that a Union victory early in the year could lead to his candidacy for the presidency. He was aware of the rumors, but had ruled out a political candidacy the possibility would soon vanish with delays on the battlefield. Overland Campaign and Petersburg siege Commanding General Grant at the Battle of Cold Harbor in 1864 The Overland Campaign was a series of battles fought in Virginia during May and June 1864. Sigels and Butlers efforts sputtered, and Grant was left alone to fight Lee. Grant crossed the Rapidan River on May 4, attacking Lee in the Battle of the Wilderness, a threeday battle with many casualties. Rather than retreat as his predecessors had done, Grant flanked Lees army to the southeast and attempted to wedge his forces between Lee and Richmond at Spotsylvania Court House. Lees army got to Spotsylvania first and a costly battle ensued, lasting thirteen days. Grant attempted to break through Lees defenses, resulting in one of the bloodiest assaults of the Civil War, known as the Battle of the Bloody Angle. Unable to break Lees lines, Grant again flanked the rebels to the southeast, meeting at North Anna, where a battle lasted three days. The Confederates had the defensive advantage, and Grant maneuvered his army to Cold Harbor, a vital railroad hub that linked to Richmond, but Lees men were again able to entrench against the Union assault. During the third day of the thirteenday battle, Grant led a costly assault. As casualty reports became known in the North, heavy criticism fell on Grant, who was castigated as the Butcher by the Northern press after taking 52,788 casualties in the thirty days since crossing the Rapidan Lees army suffered 32,907 casualties, but he was less able to replace them. The Union assault at Cold Harbor was the second of two battles in the war that Grant later said he regretted . Undetected by Lee, Grant pulled out of Cold Harbor and moved his army south of the James River, freed Butler from the Bermuda Hundred , and advanced toward Petersburg, Virginias central railroad hub. Grant next to Lincoln with General Sherman and Admiral Porter The Peacemakers After crossing the James, Grant arrived at Petersburg, threatening nearby Richmond. Beauregard defended the city, and Lees veteran reinforcements soon arrived, resulting in a ninemonth siege. Northern resentment grew as the war dragged on, but Lee was forced to defend Richmond, unable to reinforce other Confederate forces. Sheridan was assigned command of the Union Army of the Shenandoah and Grant directed him to follow the enemy to their death and to destroy vital Confederate supplies in the Shenandoah Valley. When Sheridan reported suffering attacks by John S. Mosbys irregular Confederate cavalry, Grant recommended rounding up their families for imprisonment as hostages at Fort McHenry. At Petersburg, Grant approved a plan to blow up part of the enemy trenches from an underground tunnel. The explosion created a crater, into which poorly led Union troops poured. Recovering from the surprise, Confederates surrounded the crater and easily picked off Union troops within it. The Unions 3500 casualties outnumbered the Confederates by threetoone although the plan could have been successful if implemented correctly, Grant admitted the tactic had been a stupendous failure. Rather than fight Lee in a full frontal attack as he had done at Cold Harbor, Grant continued to extend Lees defenses south and west of Petersburg to capture essential railroad links. After the Federal army rebuilt the City Point Railroad, Grant used mortars to attack Lees overstretched forces. In August, Union forces captured Mobile Bay and on September 2, Sherman captured Atlanta while Confederate forces retreated. Both victories, combined with Sheridans triumph in the Shenandoah Valley, ensured Lincolns reelection in November. Sherman convinced Grant and Lincoln to send his army to march on Savannah and devastate the Confederate heartland. Sherman cut a 60mile path of destruction of Southern infrastructure unopposed, reached the Atlantic Ocean, and captured Savannah on December 22. On December 16, after much prodding by Grant, the Union Army under Thomas smashed Hoods Confederate Army at Nashville. It was the beginning of the end for the Confederacy, with Lees forces at Petersburg being the only significant obstacle remaining. Appomattox and victory Surrender of General Lee to General Grant at Appomattox Court House, By March 1865, Grant had severely weakened Lees strength, having extended his lines to 35 miles. Lees troops deserted by the thousands due to hunger and the strains of trench warfare. Grant, Sherman, Porter, and Lincoln held a conference to discuss the surrender of Confederate armies and Reconstruction of the South on March 28. On April 2, Union troops took Petersburg and captured an evacuated Richmond the following day. Lee attempted to link up with the remnants of Joseph E. Johnstons defeated army, but Sheridans cavalry stopped the two armies from converging, cutting them off from their supply trains. Grant and Lee were in communication before he entrusted his aid Orville Babcock to carry his last dispatch to Lee with instructions to escort him to a meeting place of Lees choosing. On April 9, Grant and Lee met at Appomattox Court House, Grant extending his hand to Lee. Upon receiving Lees dispatch about the proposed meeting Grant was jubilant, but as to the actual meeting Grant later wrote in his memoirs that Lee was a man of much dignity and that he felt sad over the downfall of a foe who had fought so long and valiantly... After briefly discussing their days of old in Mexico, Grant wrote out the terms of surrender, whereupon Lee expressed satisfaction and accepted Grants terms. Going beyond his military authority, Grant gave Lee and his men amnesty Confederates would surrender their weapons and return to their homes. At Lees request, Grant also allowed them to keep their horses, all on the condition that they would not take up arms against the United States. Grant ordered his troops to stop all celebration, saying the war is over the rebels are our countrymen again. On April 26, Johnsons army surrendered to Sherman under the same terms Grant offered to Lee. On May 26, Kirby Smiths western army surrendered and the Civil War ended. Lincolns assassination On April 14, five days after Grants victory at Appomattox, he attended a cabinet meeting in Washington. Lincoln invited him and his wife to Fords Theater, but they declined as they had plans to travel to Philadelphia. In a conspiracy that targeted several government leaders, Lincoln was fatally shot by John Wilkes Booth at the theater, and died the next morning. Many, including Grant himself, thought that he had been a target in the plot. Stanton notified him of the Presidents death and summoned him back to Washington. Attending Lincolns funeral on April 19, Grant stood alone and wept openly he later said Lincoln was the greatest man I have ever known. Regarding the new President, Andrew Johnson, Grant told Julia that he dreaded the change in administrations he judged Johnsons attitude toward white southerners as one that would make them unwilling citizens, and initially thought that with President Johnson, Reconstruction has been set back no telling how far. Commanding General Beginning Reconstruction Ole Peter Hansen Ballings 1865 portrait of Grant At the wars end, Grant remained commander of the army, with duties that included enforcement of Reconstruction in the former Confederate states and supervision of Indian wars on the western Plains. Grant secured a house for his family in Georgetown Heights in 1865, but instructed Elihu Washburne that for political purposes his legal residence remained in Galena, Illinois. That same year, Grant spoke at Cooper Union in New York, where the New York Times reported that ...the entranced and bewildered multitude trembled with extraordinary delight. Further travels that summer took the Grants to Albany, New York, back to Galena, and throughout Illinois and Ohio, with enthusiastic receptions. In November 1865, Johnson sent Grant on a factfinding mission to the South. Grant recommended continuation of a reformed Freedmens Bureau, which Johnson opposed, but advised against the use of black troops in garrisons, which he believed encouraged an alternative to farm labor. Grant did not believe the people of the South were ready for selfrule, and that both whites and blacks in the South required protection by the federal government. Concerned four years of war led to a diminished respect for civil authorities, Grant concluded the Army should continue their presence to maintain order. He also warned of threats by disaffected poor people, black and white, and recommended that local decisionmaking be entrusted only to thinking men of the South . In this respect, Grants opinion on Reconstruction aligned with Johnsons policy of restoring former Confederates to their positions of power, arguing that Congress should allow representatives from the South to take their seats. Believing in Confederate amnesty, Grant pressed that former Confederates be reinlisted into the U.S. military. Grant personally intervened on behalf of Lee, who had been federally indicted for treason along with other Confederate generals, keeping Lee safe from prosecution, saving the nation from opening up old war wounds. On July 25, 1866, Congress promoted Grant to the newly created rank of General of the Army of the United States. Breach with Johnson Johnson favored a lenient approach to Reconstruction, calling for an immediate return of the former Confederate states into the Union without any guarantee of African American civil rights. The Radical Republicancontrolled Congress opposed the idea and refused to admit Congressmen from the former Confederate states. Over Johnsons vetoes, Congress renewed the Freedmens Bureau and passed the Civil Rights Act of 1866. During the congressional election campaign later that year, Johnson took his case to the people in his Swing Around the Circle speaking tour. Johnson pressured Grant, by then the most popular man in the country, to go on the tour Grant, wishing to appear loyal, agreed. Enthusiastic cheering for Grant interrupting Johnsons speeches caused the relationship between Johnson and Grant to cool. Grant believed that Johnson was purposefully agitating conservative opinion to defy Congressional Reconstruction. Finding himself increasingly at odds with Johnson, Grant believed Johnsons speeches were a national disgrace. Publicly, Grant attempted to appear loyal to the President while not alienating Republican legislators essential to his future political career. Concerned that Johnsons differences with Congress would cause renewed insurrection, he ordered Southern arsenals to ship arms north to prevent their capture by Southern state governments. Rejecting Johnsons vision for quick reconciliation with former Confederates, Congress passed three Reconstruction Acts over Johnsons vetoes, which divided the southern states into five military districts to protect the African Americans elected to political office and freedmens rights generally. Republicans gained majorities in all 11 states, and African Americans were elected to Congress and high state offices. Military governors were to lead transitional state governments in each district. Grant selected the generals and supported the new law. Grant hoped that Reconstruction Acts would help pacify the South. By complying with the Acts and instructing his subordinates to do likewise, Grant further alienated Johnson. When Sheridan removed public officials in Louisiana who impeded Reconstruction, Johnson was displeased and sought Sheridans removal Grant recommended a rebuke, but not a dismissal. In 1867, Congress passed the third Reconstruction law, which gave Grant oversight over the enforcement of the Reconstruction Acts. The Army conducted new elections for constitutional conventions in the exConfederate states. They registered blacks to vote and in many places prevented from voting white men who had supported the Confederacy, as set out in the disenfranchisement clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Johnsons impeachment Johnson wished to replace Secretary of War Stanton, a Lincoln appointee who sympathized with Congressional Reconstruction. To keep Grant under control as a potential political rival, Johnson asked him to take the post. Grant recommended against the move, in light of the Tenure of Office Act, which required Senate approval for cabinet removals. Johnson believed the Act did not apply to officers appointed by the previous president and forced the issue by making Grant an interim appointee on August 12, 1867, during a Senate recess. Grant agreed to accept the post temporarily, and Stanton vacated the office until the Senate reconvened. When the Senate reinstated Stanton, Johnson told Grant to refuse to surrender the office and let the courts resolve the matter. Grant told Johnson in private that violating the Tenure of Office Act was a federal offense, which could result in a fine or imprisonment. Believing he had no other legal alternatives, Grant returned the office to Stanton on January 14, 1868. This incurred Johnsons wrath at a cabinet meeting immediately afterward, Johnson accused Grant of breaking his promise to remain Secretary of War. Grant disputed that he had ever made such a promise although cabinet members later testified he had done so. Newspapers friendly to Johnson published a series of articles to discredit Grant over returning the War Department to Stanton, stating that Grant had been deceptive in the matter. This public insult infuriated Grant, and he defended himself in an angry letter to Johnson, after which the two men were confirmed foes. When Grants statement became public, it increased his popularity among Radical Republicans and he emerged from the controversy unscathed. Although Grant favored Johnsons impeachment, he took no active role in the impeachment proceedings, which were fueled in part by Johnsons removal of Stanton. Johnson barely survived, and none of the other Republican leaders directly involved benefited politically in their unsuccessful attempt to remove the president. Election of 1868 First inauguration of Ulysses S. Grant on the steps of the Capitol on March 4, 1869 Grant was popular among the Radical Republicans following his abandonment of Johnson over the Secretary of War dispute. The Republicans chose Grant as their presidential candidate on the first ballot at the 1868 Republican National Convention in Chicago. Grant received all 650 votes from delegates, with no other candidate being nominated, and upon the announcement was welcomed with a frenzied enthusiasm. In his letter of acceptance, Grant concluded with Let us have peace, which became his campaign slogan. For vice president, the delegates nominated House Speaker Schuyler Colfax. Grants 1862 General Order No. 11 became an issue during the presidential campaign he sought to distance himself from the order, saying I have no prejudice against sect or race, but want each individual to be judged by his own merit. As President, Grant would atone for 1862s expulsion of the Jews. Historian Jonathan Sarna argues that Grant became one of the greatest friends of Jews in American history, meeting with them often and appointing them to high office. He was the first president to condemn atrocities against Jews in Europe, thus putting human rights on the American diplomatic agenda. As was expected at the time, Grant returned to his home state and left the active campaigning to his campaign manager, William E. Chandler, and others. The Republican campaign focused on continuing Reconstruction and restoring the public credit. The Democrats nominated former New York Governor Horatio Seymour. Their campaign focused mainly on ending Reconstruction and returning control of the South to the white planter class, which alienated many War Democrats in the North. The Democrats attacked Republicans support of African American rights, while deriding Grant, calling him captain of the Black Marines. Democratic orators over and over proclaimed Grant was a drunkard. Grant himself did not take to the stump, allowing Republican spokesmen to identify him with patriotism and with grief for Lincolns martyrdom. Grant won the election by 300,000 votes out of 5,716,082 votes cast, receiving an electoral college landslide, of 214 votes to Seymours 80. Grant, at the age of 46 became the youngest president on record. His election was a triumph of principles that included sound money, efficient government, and the restoration of Southern reconstructed states. Grant was the first president elected after the nation had outlawed slavery and granted citizenship to former slaves. Implementation of these new rights was slow to come in the 1868 election, the black vote counted in only 16 of the 37 states, nearly all in the South. Grant lost Louisiana and Georgia primarily due to Ku Klux Klan violence against African American voters. Presidency On March 4, 1869, Grant was sworn in as the eighteenth President of the United States by Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase. His presidency began with a break from tradition, as Johnson did not attend Grants inauguration at the Capitol or ride with him as he departed the White House for the last time. Grant assumed the presidency with reluctance. In an 1869 letter to Sherman he wrote In his inaugural address, Grant urged the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment and said he would approach Reconstruction calmly, without prejudice, hate or sectional pride. He also recommended the proper treatment of Native Americans be studied, advocating their civilization and eventual citizenship. Although some historians have belittled Grants cabinet as being mediocre, according to biographers Jean Edward Smith and Ron Chernow, it had distinguished members, including former congressmen, senators, governors, and judges. Without senatorial consultation, Grants unconventional cabinet choices sparked both criticism and approval. In his effort to create national harmony, he purposely avoided choosing Republican Party leaders, selecting several nonpoliticians. Grant chose two close friends for important posts Elihu B. Washburne for Secretary of State and John A. Rawlins as Secretary of War Washburne was soon appointed minister to France and replaced by conservative New York statesman Hamilton Fish. Rawlins died in office after serving only a few months, replaced by William W. Belknap of Iowa. For Treasury, he appointed wealthy New York merchant Alexander T. Stewart, who was found ineligible and replaced by Representative George S. Boutwell, a Massachusetts Radical Republican. Grant appointed Philadelphia businessman Adolph E. Borie Secretary of Navy, who soon resigned, and was replaced by a relative unknown, George M. Robeson. Grants nomination of James Longstreet, a former Confederate general, to the position of Surveyor of customs of the port of New Orleans, was met with general amazement, and was largely seen as a genuine effort to unite the North and South. Other cabinet appointments Jacob D. Cox , John Creswell , and Ebenezer Rockwood Hoar were well received. Grant nominated Sherman his Army successor as generalinchief and gave him control over War bureau chiefs. When Rawlins took over the War Department, He complained to Grant that Sherman was given too much authority. Grant reluctantly revoked his own order, upsetting Sherman and damaging their wartime friendship. Grant also appointed four Justices to the Supreme Court William Strong, Joseph P. Bradley, Ward Hunt and Chief Justice Morrison Waite. Hunt voted to uphold Reconstruction laws while Waite and Bradley did much to undermine them. To rectify his controversial General Order 11 during the Civil War, Grant appointed Jewish leaders to office, including Simon Wolf recorder of deeds in Washington D.C., Edward S. Salomon Governor of the Washington Territory. When Grant first moved into the White House, he had a statue of Thomas Jefferson, the third president, removed from the grounds and returned to the Capitol Rotunda. Later Reconstruction and civil rights Amos T. AkermanAttorney General who vigorously prosecuted the Ku Klux Klan. When Grants term began, Republicans controlled most Southern states. Professor Richard Scher states, The Republican governments, the first of which did not appear until 1868, were propped up by the Republicandominated federal government, northern Republican money, and the presence of an army of occupation. Unlike Johnson, Grants vision of Reconstruction included federal enforcement of civil rights and spoke out against voter intimidation of Southern blacks. In his message to Congress in 1874, Grant wrote, Treat the negro as a citizen and a voter, as he is and must remain, and soon parties will be divided, not on the color line, but on principle. He lobbied Congress to pass the Fifteenth Amendment, guaranteeing that no state could prevent someone from voting based on race, and believed that its passage would secure freedmens rights. Grant asked Congress to admit representatives from the remaining unrepresented Southern states conforming with Congressional Reconstruction, and passed legislation providing that Mississippi, Virginia, and Texas would be represented in Congress after they ratified the Fifteenth Amendment. Grant pressured Congress to draw up legislation that would seat African American state legislators in Georgia, who had been ousted by white conservatives. Congress responded through legislation the members were reseated in the Georgia legislature, and Georgia was required to adopt the Fifteenth Amendment to regain representation in Congress. By July 1870, the remaining states were readmitted. To bolster the new amendment, Grant relied on the army and signed legislation creating the Justice Department, primarily to enforce federal laws in the South. Where the attorney general had once been only a legal adviser to the president, he now led a cabinet department dedicated to enforcing federal law, including a solicitor general to argue on the governments behalf in court. Under Grants first attorney general, Ebenezer R. Hoar, the administration was not very aggressive in prosecuting white Southerners who terrorized their black neighbors, but Hoars successor, Amos T. Akerman, was more zealous. Grant encouraged Congress to pass a series of laws, called the Enforcement Acts, from 1870 to 1871. The first was a criminal code upon the subject of elections, outlawing discrimination by state officials on voters based on race. It also authorized the President to appoint supervisors over the election, and bring cases to federal court. But it left private criminal acts to be handled by state authorities. Alarmed by a rise in terror by the Ku Klux Klan and other groups against African Americans, Congress enacted a far more sweeping measure, the Ku Klux Klan Act of 1871, which for the first time designated certain crimes as punishable under federal law. In May 1871, Grant ordered federal troops to help marshals in arresting Klansmen. That October, Grant suspended habeas corpus in part of South Carolina and sent federal troops to enforce the law there. After prosecutions by Akerman and his replacement, George Henry Williams, the Klans power collapsed by 1872, elections in the South saw African Americans voting in record numbers. That same year, Grant signed the Amnesty Act, which restored political rights to former Confederates. Lacking sufficient funding, the Justice Department stopped prosecutions of the Klan in June 1873 civil rights prosecutions continued throughout Grants second term but with fewer yearly cases and convictions. Additionally, Grants Postmaster General John Creswell, using his patronage powers, integrated the postal system and appointed African American postmasters across the nation. Picture of mobs rioting, wearing uniforms and using weapons on a city street, entitled The Louisiana Outrage White Leaguers attacking the integrated police force and state militia, New Orleans, September 1874 After the Klans decline, a faction of southern conservatives called Redeemers formed armed groups, such as the Red Shirts and the White League who openly used violence and intimidation in an attempt to take control of state governments. The Panic of 1873 and the ensuing depression contributed to public fatigue, and the North grew less concerned with Reconstruction. Supreme Court rulings in the SlaughterHouse Cases and United States v. Cruikshank restricted federal enforcement of civil rights. Grant began to limit the use of troops to avoid the impression that he was acting as a military dictator. In 1874, Grant ended the Brooks Baxter War bringing Reconstruction in Arkansas to a peaceful conclusion that same year, he sent troops and warships under Major General William H. Emory to New Orleans in the wake of the Colfax Massacre and disputes over the election of Governor William Pitt Kellogg. Emory restored Kellogg to office and the following year the parties reached a compromise allowing Democrats to retain control of the Louisiana House. Grant recalled Sheridan and most of the federal troops from Louisiana. By 1875, Redeemer Democrats took control of all but three Southern states. As violence against black Southerners escalated once more, Attorney General Edwards Pierrepont told Governor Adelbert Ames of Mississippi that the people were tired of the autumnal outbreaks in the South, and declined to intervene directly, instead, sending an emissary to negotiate a peaceful election. Grant later regretted not issuing a proclamation to help Ames, having been told Republicans in Ohio would bolt the party if Grant intervened in Mississippi. Grant told Congress in January 1875 he could not see with indifference Union men or Republicans ostracized, persecuted, and murdered. Congress refused to strengthen the laws against violence, but instead passed a sweeping law to guarantee blacks access to public facilities. Grant signed it as the Civil Rights Act of 1875, but enforcement was weak and the Supreme Court ruled the law unconstitutional in 1883. In October 1876, Grant dispatched troops to South Carolina to aid Republican Governor Daniel Henry Chamberlain. Grants successor, Hayes, abandoned the remaining three Republican governments in the South that were supported by the army after the Compromise of 1877, which marked the end of Reconstruction. Indian peace policy Ely Samuel ParkerSeneca Indian appointed by Grant as Commissioner of Indian Affairs When Grant took office in 1869, the nations policy towards Indians was in chaos, with more than 250,000 Indians being governed by 370 treaties. Grant promised in his inaugural address to work toward the proper treatment of the original occupants of this land the Indians. He appointed Ely S. Parker, a Seneca Indian, a member of his wartime staff, as Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the first Native American to serve in this position. With his familiarity of Indian life, Parker became the chief architect of Grants Peace Policy. In April 1869, Grant signed a law establishing a Board of Indian Commissioners to oversee spending and reduce corruption in the Bureau of Indian Affairs. In 1871, he signed a bill ending the Indian treaty system the law now treated individual Native Americans as wards of the federal government, and no longer dealt with the tribes as sovereign entities. Grant believed that Indians, given opportunities for education and work, could serve alongside white men. His Peace Policy aimed to replace entrepreneurs serving as Indian agents with missionaries and aimed to protect Indians on reservations and educate them in farming. My efforts in the future will be directed, Grant said in his second inaugural address, by a humane course, to bring the aborigines of the country under the benign influences of education and civilization... Wars of extermination... are demoralizing and wicked. Grants policy had greater success in the Southwest. General Oliver Otis Howard negotiated peace with the Apache in 1872, convincing their leader, Cochise, to move the tribe to a new reservation, and ending a war started the year before. In Oregon, relations were less peaceful, as war with the Modocs erupted in April 1873. The Modocs refused to move to a reservation and killed the local army commander, Major General Edward Canby. Grant ordered restraint after Canbys death, disregarding Shermans advice to seek revenge or exterminate the tribe. The army captured, tried, and executed the four Modoc warriors responsible for Canbys murder, and Grant ordered the rest of the Modoc tribe relocated to the Indian Territory. In 1874, the army defeated the Comanche Indians at the Battle of Palo Duro Canyon. Their villages were burned and horses slaughtered, eventually forcing them to finally settle at the Fort Sill reservation in 1875. Grant pocketvetoed a bill in 1874 protecting bison and supporting Interior Secretary Columbus Delano, who believed the killing of bison would force Plains Indians to abandon their nomadic lifestyle. The Plains tribes accepted the reservation system, but encounters with prospectors and settlers in search of gold in the Black Hills led to renewed conflict in the Great Sioux War of 1876, ending the understanding that had developed between Grant and Sioux Chief Red Cloud. Grant was determined to enforce the treaty using the army if necessary, but after summoning Sheridan to Washington he was reminded that the postCivil War army was undermanned and spread thinly, and that the territory involved was vast, requiring great numbers of soldiers to enforce the treaty as a result, it was never enforced. During the war, Sioux warriors led by Crazy Horse killed George Armstrong Custer and his men at the Battle of the Little Big Horn, the armys most famous defeat in the Indian wars. Later, Grant castigated Custer in the press, saying I regard Custers massacre as a sacrifice of troops, brought on by Custer himself, that was wholly unnecessary wholly unnecessary. In spite of Grants efforts, over 200 battles were fought with the Indians during his presidency. The policy was considered humanitarian for its time but was later criticized for disregarded native cultures. Foreign affairs The most pressing foreign policy concerns when Grant took office were resolving the Alabama claims against Great Britain and whether to recognize Cuban belligerency. The dispute with the United Kingdom stemmed from a complex of grievances centering on attacks on American shipping during the Civil War by the , a Confederate warship constructed in England. Senator Charles Sumner, Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, believed the British had violated American neutrality and demanded reparations. Sumner convinced his fellow Senators to reject the Johnson administrations proposed settlement, believing that Britain should directly pay 2 billion in gold or, alternatively, cede Canada to the United States. Fish and Boutwell convinced Grant that peaceful relations with Britain were more important than acquisition of territory, and the two nations agreed to negotiate along those lines. To avoid jeopardizing negotiations, Grant refrained from recognizing Cuban rebels who were fighting for independence from Spain, which would have been inconsistent with American objections to the British granting belligerent status to Confederates. A commission in Washington produced a treaty whereby an international tribunal would settle the damage amounts the British admitted regret, but not fault. The Senate approved the Treaty of Washington, which also settled disputes over fishing rights and maritime boundaries, by a 50 12 vote in 1871. Grants success with Britain was undermined by his attempt to annex the Dominican Republic, an independent nation unable to pay its debt. Many Americans believed a Caribbean naval base would establish naval dominance and be useful in protecting shipping from piracy in a potential isthmian canal. Antiimperialist Republicans had previously rejected a Johnson administration treaty to establish a Saman Bay naval base. Grant took interest in Dominican annexation and sent his secretary, Orville E. Babcock, there to consult with Buenaventura Bez, the proannexation Dominican president. Babcock returned in September 1869 with a draft treaty of annexation, although Fish had not given him any diplomatic authority. Given such authority by Fish, Babcock visited the island nation a second time making a treaty for Dominican annexation and the lease of Saman Bay. The cabinet discussed the treaties at a meeting on December 21. Fish dismissed annexation, seeing the island as politically unstable. Grant supported it, believing acquisition of the majorityblack nation would increase commerce, create a refuge for African Americans, and help to exploit the islands natural resources. He lobbied Sumner in hopes of influencing him to help with passage of the treaties. Fish added to the effort out of loyalty to Grant, but to no avail Sumner was set against annexation and on June 30, 1870, the Senate rejected the treaties. A congressional investigation headed by Senator Carl Schurz revealed speculators had promoted the treaties passage. Unwilling to admit defeat, Grant convinced Congress to send a commission to investigate. Although the commission approved Grants call for annexation in its findings, the Senate remained opposed and Grant was forced to abandon further efforts. Grant retaliated by firing Sumners friend and Minister to Great Britain, John Lothrop Motley, while he pressured the Senate to depose Sumner of his chairmanship. King Kalkaua of Hawaii meets President Grant at the White House in 1874 In October 1873, Grants neutrality policy was shaken, when a Spanish cruiser captured a merchant ship, Virginius , flying the U.S. flag, carrying war materials and men to aid the Cuban insurrection. Spanish authorities executed the prisoners, including eight American citizens, and many Americans called for war with Spain. Grant ordered the Navy to increase its presence in the Caribbean. Fish, with Grants support, worked to reach a peaceful resolution. Spains president, Emilio Castelar y Ripoll, expressed regret for the tragedy, surrendered the Virginius and paid a cash indemnity of 80,000 to the families of the executed Americans. Realizing the Navy was susceptible to European naval powers, in June 1874, Secretary Robeson commissioned the reconstruction of five redesigned doubleturreted monitor warships. The administrations diplomacy was also at work in the Pacific. In December 1874, Grant held a state dinner at the White House for the King of Hawaii, David Kalakaua, who was seeking dutyfree sugar importation to the US. Grant and Fish secured a free trade treaty in 1875 with the Kingdom of Hawaii, incorporating the Pacific islands sugar industry into the United States economic sphere. Gold standard and the Gold Ring Soon after taking office, Grant took steps to return the nations currency to a more secure footing. During the Civil War, Congress had authorized the Treasury to issue banknotes that, unlike the rest of the currency, were not backed by gold or silver. The greenback notes, as they were known, were necessary to pay the unprecedented war debts, but they also caused inflation and forced goldbacked money out of circulation Grant determined to return the national economy to prewar monetary standards. On March 18, Grant signed into law the Public Credit Act of 1869 that guaranteed bondholders would be repaid in coin or its equivalent while greenbacks would gradually be redeemed by the Treasury and replaced by notes backed by specie, the act committed the government to full return of the gold standard within ten years.U.S. Federal Reserve Board, 2007 To strengthen the dollar, Treasury Secretary George S. Boutwell, backed by Grant, sold gold from the Treasury biweekly and bought back highinterest Treasury bonds issued during the war this had the effect of reducing the deficit, but deflating the currency. By September 1, Boutwell had reduced the national debt by 50 million. A cartoon showing Jim Fisk stirring up the gold market in New York while Grant releases Treasury gold to defeat the Gold Ring. The efforts undertook to control the gold market and help the national economy set the stage for a major financial scandal. Jay Gould, a Wall Street trader and railroad magnate, and financier Jim Fisk, seeking to drive up the gold price, enlisted the help of another speculator Abel Corbin, Grants brotherinlaw, who used his connection with the president to get inside information Corbin and Gould lobbied for and convinced Grant to appoint Goulds associate, Daniel Butterfield, as Assistant Treasurer, allowing Butterfield to gather inside information for the Ring. Meanwhile, Gould and Fisk quietly stockpiled gold. Gould convinced Corbin that a high gold price would be good for the nations prosperity, and Corbin passed this theory on to Grant, who allowed the Treasury to act accordingly. After consulting in early September with Alexander Stewart , Grant stopped the sale of gold, believing a higher gold price would help Western farmers. By midSeptember, Grant warned Boutwell to be on his guard as the gold price continued to rise, while the conspirators bought ever more and the rising price affected the wider economy. Grant, seeing that the increase was unnatural, told Boutwell to sell gold, which reduced its price. Boutwell did so the next day, on September 24, 1869, later known as Black Friday. The sale of gold from the Treasury defeated Goulds scheme as the gold price plummeted, relieving the economic tension. This caused a mild recession, but by January 1870, the economy resumed its postwar recovery. Gould and Fisk managed to escape without much harm to themselves. A Congressional investigation followed, chaired by James A. Garfield and cleared Grant of wrongdoing, but excoriated Gould and Fisk for their manipulation of the gold market and Corbin for exploiting his personal connection to Grant. Election of 1872 and second term Cartoon by Thomas Nast on Grants opponents in the reelection campaign Grant was sworn in for his second term by Salmon P. Chase on March 4, 1873. In his second inaugural address, he reiterated the problems still facing the nation and focused on what he considered the chief issues of the day freedom and fairness for all Americans while emphasizing the benefits of citizenship for freed slaves. Grant concluded his address with the words, My efforts in the future will be directed towards the restoration of good feelings between the different sections of our common community. Despite his administrations scandals, Grant continued to be personally popular. His reelection was supported by Frederick Douglas and other prominent abolitionists along with reformers of the Indian question. A growing number of political reformers, however, were disappointed by the Gold Ring, Grants support of Reconstruction, and corruption in the New York Customs House. To placate them, Grant created a Civil Service Commission authorized by Congress in 1871. The Commission, chaired by reformer George William Curtis, proposed reformist rules and regulations, which Grant implemented by executive order in April 1872, Congress appropriating funds in May. Congress stopped funding the Commission in December 1875, having refused to pass legislation to implement its recommendations. There was further intraparty division between the faction most concerned with the plight of the freedmen, and the faction concerned with the growth of industry and small government. During the war, both factions interests had aligned, and in 1868 both had supported Grant. As the wartime coalition began to fray, Grants alignment with the partys proReconstruction elements alienated party leaders who favored an end to federal intervention in Southern racial issues. Many of that faction split from the party in 1872, calling themselves the Liberal Republican Party. Led by Charles Francis Adams of Massachusetts and Senator Carl Schurz of Missouri, they denounced the patronage system that Sumner, a Liberal Republican sympathizer, called Grantism opposed a strong federal government and demanded amnesty for Confederate soldiers. The Liberal Republicans distrusted black suffrage and demanded literacy tests for voting while opposing federal enforcement of equal voting rights in the South. They nominated Horace Greeley, a leading Republican newspaper editor and a fierce enemy of Grant. Democrats, seeking to benefit from antiGrant sentiment, nominated Greeley as well. The opposition pushed the themes that Grant was a scandalridden crook, a drunkard, an ignoramus, a dictator, and utterly depraved. The regular Republican Party nominated Grant for reelection, with Senator Henry Wilson of Massachusetts replacing Colfax as vicepresidential nominee. Wilson, viewed as a practical reformer and civil rights advocate, was meant to strengthen the Republican ticket, but a a bribery scandal ensnared both Colfax and Wilson. To placate the burgeoning suffragist movement, the Republicans platform included that womens rights should be treated with respectful consideration, while Grant advocated equal rights for all citizens. To the Liberals chagrin, Greeley made Grants Southern policy, rather than reform, the main campaign issue. The fusion effort failed and Grant was easily reelected. Liberal Republicans were unable to deliver many votes, and Greeley was only successful in areas the Democrats would have carried without him. Federal prosecution of the Klan, a strong economy, debt reduction, lowered tariffs, repeal of the income tax, and civil service reforms helped Grant defeat Greeley. Grant won 56 percent of the popular vote and an Electoral College landslide of 286 to 66. A majority of African Americans in the South voted for Grant, while Democratic opposition remained mostly peaceful. Grant lost in six former slave states that wanted to see an end to Reconstruction. In 1873 Wilson suffered a stroke never fully recovering, he died in office on November 22, 1875. With Wilsons loss, Grant relied on Fishs guidance more than ever. Panic of 1873 and loss of Congress Grant continued to work for a strong dollar, signing into law the Coinage Act of 1873, which effectively ended the legal basis for bimetallism , establishing the gold standard in practice. The Coinage Act discontinued the standard silver dollar and established the gold dollar as the sole monetary standard the result was deflation. Silverites who wanted more money in circulation to raise prices farmers received denounced the move as the Crime of 1873, claiming the deflation made debts more burdensome for farmers. Grant is congratulated for vetoing the inflation bill in 1874. Grants second term saw renewed economic turmoil. In September 1873, Jay Cooke Company, a New York brokerage house, collapsed after it failed to sell all of the bonds issued by Jay Cookes Northern Pacific Railway. The collapse rippled through Wall Street, and other banks and brokerages that owned railroad stocks and bonds were also ruined. On September 20, the New York Stock Exchange suspended trading for ten days. Grant, who knew little about finance, traveled to New York to consult leading businessmen and bankers for advice on how to resolve the crisis, which became known as the Panic of 1873. Grant believed that, as with the collapse of the Gold Ring in 1869, the panic was merely an economic fluctuation that affected bankers and brokers. He instructed the Treasury to buy 10 million in government bonds, injecting cash into the system. The purchases curbed the panic on Wall Street but an industrial depression, later called the Long Depression, nonetheless swept the nation. Many of the nations railroads 89 out of 364 went bankrupt. Congress hoped inflation would stimulate the economy and passed what became known as the Inflation Bill in 1874. Many farmers and workingmen favored the bill, which would have added 64 million in greenbacks to circulation, but some Eastern bankers opposed it because it would have weakened the dollar. Belknap, Williams, and Delano told Grant a veto would hurt Republicans in the November elections. Grant believed the bill would destroy the credit of the nation, and he vetoed it despite their objections. Grants veto placed him in the conservative faction of the Republican Party and was the beginning of the partys commitment to a strong goldbacked dollar. Grant later pressured Congress for a bill to further strengthen the dollar by gradually reducing the number of greenbacks in circulation. When the Democrats gained a majority in the House after the 1874 elections, the lameduck Republican Congress did so before the Democrats took office. On January 14, 1875, Grant signed the Specie Payment Resumption Act into law, which required gradual reduction of the number of greenbacks allowed to circulate and declared that specie payment would resume in 1879. Gilded Age corruption and reform Cartoonist Thomas Nast praises Grant for rejecting demands by Pennsylvania politicians to suspend civil service rules. Grant was president during the Gilded Age, a time of massive industrial wealth, railroad speculation, and extravagance that fueled unethical behavior and influence in government offices. Although Grant was not personally involved in scandal, multiple corruption charges swept through his administration, clouding Grants historical reputation. Grant, who himself had speculated in markets, was greatly trusting of men and could not quite resist the enticement of wealthy Gilded Age tycoons, while often remaining loyal to his corrupt cabinet members or appointees, often believing in their innocence. Grants failure was in his poor selection of cabinet officers and how he responded to their downfalls. Grant did not stop the guilty parties prosecutions, but was often insistent about having them prosecuted. His political enemies, outraged over the scandals, were eager to discredit Reconstruction, and the moral integrity of his administration. No person linked any of the scandals together, except possibly Grants personal secretary, Orville E. Babcock, who indirectly controlled many cabinet departments and delayed federal investigations. Historians debate how effective he was at halting corruption. In November 1871, New York Collector and a member of New York Senator Roscoe Conklings political machine, was forced to resign. Murphy, a Grant appointee, had become embroiled in a dispute with another faction of the Republican party over the jobs at his disposal and was investigated by Congress for mismanagement and corruption in office. In December, Grant appointed Chester A. Arthur, another Conkling man, to replace Murphy, and administration of the Customs House steadily improved. On March 3, 1873, Grant signed into law a congressional and presidential salary increase. The unpopular Salary Grab Act was repealed in December, although Grant was allowed to keep his pay raise. The scandals escalated during Grants second term, even reaching into Grants inner circle. In 1874, a congressional investigation exposed corruption in the Treasury Department, known as the Sanborn incident. Previously, acting Treasury Secretary William Adams Richardson, hired John B. Sanborn as an independent tax collector on a 50 percent commission basis, known as a moiety . Richardson became Secretary of Treasury in March 1873. Sanborn was given virtual control of the Treasury, and he used excessive intrusive methods of obtaining taxes An 1874 congressional investigation exposed Sanborns malicious profiteering and condemned Richardson for allowing Sanborn to abuse the law but did not attempt impeachment. Richardson resigned when the House motioned his censure and Grant appointed him judge of the Court of Claims. In June 1874, Grant signed the AntiMoiety Act, abolishing that system. Harpers Weekly cartoon on Bristows Whiskey Ring investigation Grant replaced Richardson as Treasury Secretary with Benjamin H. Bristow, a man known for his honesty, who began a series of reforms in the department. Since the Civil War, whiskey distillers and corrupt treasury agents falsified figures on the amount of liquor produced, while certifying bogus returns, denying the treasury of revenue. Discovering that millions of gallons of whiskey escaped taxation, and having Grants endorsement to act , Bristow in May 1875 struck at the Whiskey Ring. He ordered federal marshals to seize 32 installations and arrest 350 men Bristow obtained 176 indictments that led to 110 convictions, and giving 3,150,000 to the Treasury. Bristows investigation implicated Babcock and Missouri treasury agent John McDonald as part of the Whiskey Ring. When informed on separate occasions, Grant became defensive concerning Babcock, but concerning McDonald, the ringleader, Grant believed he had been betrayed. In 1876, a jury acquitted Babcock at a trial influenced by Grants deposition in Babcocks favor. After the trial, Grant dismissed Babcock from the White House. Grant freed some Ring members after a few months in prison, including McDonald, released after serving 17 months in jail. Grants Civil Service Commission had limited success. Some cabinet members implemented a merit system that increased the number of qualified candidates and relied less on Congressional patronage. Delano, however, exempted his department from competitive examinations, and Congress refused to enact permanent Civil Service reform. Zachariah Chandler, who succeeded Delano in 1875, reformed the Interior Department and fired corrupt clerks in the Bureau of Indian Affairs. The same year, Grant fired Attorney General George Henry Williams after his wife was discovered to be involved in a bribery scandal, and appointed reformer Edwards Pierrepont in his place. Grant suggested other reforms as well, including a proposal that states should offer free public schooling to all children he also endorsed the Blaine Amendment, which would have forbidden government aid to schools with religious affiliations. When the Democrats took control of the House in 1875, they launched a series of investigations into corruption in federal departments. The most damaging of these involved Secretary of War William W. Belknap taking quarterly kickbacks from the Fort Sill tradership, which led to his resignation in February 1876. Belknap was impeached and tried by the Senate that summer, but was not convicted. Congress also investigated and reprimanded Navy Secretary Robeson in July 1876 for bribery. In November 1876, Grant apologized to the nation and admitted mistakes in his administration, saying, failures have been errors of judgement, not of intent. Election of 1876 Even as Grant drew cheers at the opening of the Centennial Exposition in May 1876, the collected scandals of his presidency, the countrys weak economy, and the Democratic gains in the House led many in the Republican party to repudiate him in June. Bristow was among the leading candidates to replace him, suggesting that a large faction desired an end to Grantism and feared that Grant would run for a third term. Ultimately, Grant declined to run, but Bristow also failed to capture the nomination, as the convention settled on Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio, a reformer. The Democrats nominated Governor Samuel J. Tilden of New York. Voting irregularities in three Southern states caused the election that year to remain undecided for several months. Grant told Congress to settle the matter through legislation and assured both sides that he would not use the army to force a result, except to curb violence. On January 29, 1877, he signed legislation forming an Electoral Commission to decide the matter. The Commission ruled that the disputed votes belonged to Hayes to forestall Democratic protests, Republicans agreed to the Compromise of 1877, in which the last troops were withdrawn from Southern capitals. The Republicans had won, but Reconstruction was over. According to biographer Jean Edward Smith, Grants calm visage in the White House reassured the nation. Cabinet President Ulysses S. Grant Grants Cabinet, 1876 1877 Postpresidency World tour and diplomacy Grant and Bismarck in 1878 After leaving the White House, Grant and his family stayed with Fish in Washington for two months before setting out on a world tour that lasted approximately two and a half years. Preparing for the tour, they arrived in Philadelphia on May 10, 1877, and were honored with celebrations during the week before their departure. On May 16, Grant and Julia left for England aboard the SS Indiana . During the tour the Grants made stops in Europe, the Mediterranean the Holy Land and points in the Middle East, meeting with notable dignitaries, such as Queen Victoria, Pope Leo XIII, Otto von Bismarck, Emperor Meiji and others. Grant was the first U.S. President to visit Jerusalem and the Holy Land. During the tour, supported by the Hayes administration transported on naval ships, Grant assumed an unprecedented diplomatic capacity, unofficially representing the United States to stregthen American interests abroad, while resolving issues for some countries in the process. Homesick, the Grants left Japan sailing on the City of Tokio escorted by a Japanese manofwar, crossed the Pacific and landed in San Francisco in September 1879, greeted by cheering crowds. Third term attempt In the Democratic magazine Puck , cartoonist Joseph Ferdinand Keppler lampooned Grants alleged support of profiteering rings among his associates. Stalwarts, led by Grants old political ally, Roscoe Conkling, saw the expresidents renewed popularity as a way for their faction to regain power. Opponents called it a violation of the twoterm rule that had been the norm since George Washington. Grant said nothing publicly, but he wanted the job and encouraged his men. Washburne urged him to run Grant demurred, saying he would be happy for the Republicans to win with another candidate, though he preferred James G. Blaine to John Sherman. Even so, Conkling and John A. Logan began to organize delegates in Grants favor. When the convention convened in Chicago in June, there were more delegates pledged to Grant than to any other candidate, but he was still short of a majority vote to capture the nomination. At the convention, Conkling nominated Grant with an elegant speech, the most famous line being When asked which state he hails from, our sole reply shall be, he hails from Appomattox and its famous apple tree. With 370 votes needed for nomination, the first ballot had Grant at 304, Blaine at 284, Sherman at 93, and the rest scattered to minor candidates. Subsequent ballots followed, with roughly the same result neither Grant nor Blaine could win. After thirtysix ballots, Blaines delegates deserted him and combined with those of other candidates to nominate a compromise candidate Representative James A. Garfield of Ohio. A procedural motion made the vote unanimous for Garfield, who accepted the nomination. Grant gave speeches for Garfield but declined to criticize the Democratic nominee, Winfield Scott Hancock, a general who had served under him in the Army of the Potomac. Garfield won the election. Grant gave Garfield his public support and pushed him to include Stalwarts in his administration. On July 2, 1881, Garfield was shot by an assassin and died on September 19. On learning of Garfields death from a reporter, Grant wept bitterly. Business reversals When Grant had returned to America from his costly world tour, he had depleted most of his savings and needed to earn money and find a new home. Wealthy friends bought him a home on Manhattans Upper East Side, and to make an income, Grant, Jay Gould, and former Mexican Finance Secretary Matas Romero chartered the Mexican Southern Railroad, with plans to build a railroad from Oaxaca to Mexico City. Grant urged Chester A. Arthur, who had succeeded Garfield as president in 1881, to negotiate a free trade treaty with Mexico. Arthur and the Mexican government agreed, but the United States Senate rejected the treaty in 1883. The railroad was similarly unsuccessful, falling into bankruptcy the following year. At the same time, Grants son Ulysses Jr. had opened a Wall Street brokerage house with Ferdinand Ward. Ward was regarded as a rising star and the firm, Grant Ward, was initially successful. In 1883, Grant joined the firm and invested 100,000 of his own money. To encourage investment, Ward paid investors abnormally high interest, by pledging the companys securities on multiple loans in a process called rehypothecation . Ward, in collusion with banker James D. Fish, kept secret from bank examiners, retrieved the firms securities from the companys bank vault. When the trades went bad, multiple loans came due, all backed up by the same collateral. Historians agree that Grant was likely unaware of Wards intentions, but it is unclear how much Buck Grant knew. In May 1884, enough investments went bad to convince Ward that the firm would soon be bankrupt. Ward told Grant of the impending failure, but assured Grant that this was a temporary shortfall. Grant approached businessman William Henry Vanderbilt, who gave him a personal loan of 150,000. Grant invested the money in the firm, but it was not enough to save it from failure. Essentially penniless, but compelled by a sense of personal honor, he repaid what he could with his Civil War mementos and the sale or transfer of all other assets. Vanderbilt took title to Grants home, although he allowed the Grants to continue to reside there, and pledged to donate the souvenirs to the federal government and insisted the debt had been paid in full. Grant was distraught over Wards deception and asked privately how he could ever trust any human being again. In March 1885, as his health was failing, he testified against both Ward and Fish. Ward was convicted of fraud in October 1885, months after Grants death, and served six and a half years in prison. Memoirs, pension, and death To restore his familys income and reputation, Grant wrote several articles on his Civil War campaigns for The Century Magazine at 500 each. The articles were well received by critics, and the editor, Robert Underwood Johnson, suggested that Grant write a book of memoirs, as Sherman and others had done. Grants articles would serve as the basis for several chapters. In the summer of 1884, Grant complained of a sore throat but put off seeing a doctor until late October when he learned it was cancer, possibly caused by his frequent cigar smoking. Grant chose not to reveal the seriousness of his condition to his wife, who soon found out from Grants doctor. Before being diagnosed, Grant was invited to a Methodist service for Civil War veterans in Ocean Grove, New Jersey, on August 4, 1884, receiving a standing ovation from more than ten thousand veterans and others it would be his last public appearance. In March of the following year, the New York Times announced that Grant was dying of cancer and a nationwide public concern for the former president began. Knowing of Grant and Julias financial difficulties, Congress sought to honor him and restored him to the rank of General of the Army with full retirement pay . Grant was nearly broke and worried constantly about leaving his wife a suitable amount of money to live on. Century magazine offered Grant a book contract with a 10 percent royalty, but Grants friend Mark Twain, understanding how bad Grants financial condition was, made him an offer for his memoirs which paid an unheardof 75 percent royalty. To provide for his family, Grant worked intensely on his memoirs at his home in New York City. His former staff member Adam Badeau assisted him with much of the research, while his son Frederick located documents and did much of the fact checking. Because of the summer heat and humidity, his doctors recommended that he move upstate to a cottage at the top of Mount McGregor, offered by a family friend. Grant finished his memoir and died only a few days later. Grants memoirs treat his early life and time in the Mexican American War briefly and are inclusive of his life up to the end of the Civil War. The Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant , was a critical and commercial success. Julia Grant received about 450,000 in royalties. Grants successful autobiography pioneered a method for expresidents and veterans to earn money. The memoir has been highly regarded by the public, military historians, and literary critics. Grant portrayed himself in the persona of the honorable Western hero, whose strength lies in his honesty and straightforwardness. He candidly depicted his battles against both the Confederates and internal army foes. Twain called the Memoirs a literary masterpiece. Given over a century of favorable literary analysis, reviewer Mark Perry states that the Memoirs are the most significant work of American nonfiction. After a yearlong struggle with cancer, surrounded by his family, Grant died at 8 oclock in the morning in the Mount McGregor cottage on July 23, 1885, at the age of 63. Sheridan, then Commanding General of the Army, ordered a daylong tribute to Grant on all military posts, and President Grover Cleveland ordered a thirtyday nationwide period of mourning. After private services, the honor guard placed Grants body on a special funeral train, which traveled to West Point and New York City. A quarter of a million people viewed it in the two days before the funeral. Tens of thousands of men, many of them veterans from the Grand Army of the Republic marched with Grants casket drawn by two dozen horses to Riverside Park in the Morningside Heights neighborhood of Upper Manhattan. His pallbearers included Union generals Sherman and Sheridan, Confederate generals Simon Bolivar Buckner and Joseph E. Johnston, Admiral David Dixon Porter, and Senator John A. Logan, the head of the GAR. Following the casket in the sevenmilelong procession were President Cleveland, the two living former presidents Hayes and Arthur, all of the Presidents Cabinet, as well as the justices of the Supreme Court. Grants body was laid to rest in Riverside Park, first in a temporary tomb, and then twelve years later, on April 17, 1897 in the General Grant National Memorial, also known as Grants Tomb, the largest mausoleum in North America. Attendance at the New York funeral topped 1.5 million. Ceremonies were held in other major cities around the country, while Grant was eulogized in the press and likened to George Washington and Abraham Lincoln. Historical reputation Commanding General GrantConstant Mayers portrait of 1866 Many historians and biographers have been intrigued and challenged by contradictions in Grants life, and few presidential reputations have shifted as dramatically as his. At his death, Grant was seen as a symbol of the American national identity and memory. Soon afterward, Grants reputation fell under severe criticism as national reconciliation took hold among whites throughout the country. Later accounts portrayed his administration as corrupt as the popularity of the proConfederate Lost Cause theory and the Dunning School movement grew early in the 20th century, a more negative view of Grant became common. In 1917, historian Louis Arthur Coolidge bucked the trend of negativity and said Grants success as President was hardly less significant than his success at war. In 1931, historians Paxson and Bach noted that Grants presidency had some achievements, after all. In 1934, historian Robert R. McCormick said Grants military triumphs were neglected due in part to the malicious and deliberate design of Lost Cause veterans and writers. In the 1950s, historians Bruce Catton and T. Harry Williams began a reassessment of Grants military career, shifting the analysis of Grant as victor by brute force to that of successful, skillful, modern strategist and commander. William S. McFeely won the Pulitzer Prize for his critical 1981 biography that credited Grants initial presidential efforts on civil rights, but lamented his failure to carry out lasting progress. In the 21st century Grants reputation among historians has improved markedly. Historians opinions of Grants presidency now better appreciate Grants personal integrity, Reconstruction efforts and peace policy towards Indians, even when they fell short.The Economist, essay In 2016, Ronald C. White continued this trend with a biography that historian T. J. Stiles said, solidifies the positive image amassed in recent decades, blotting out the caricature of a military butcher and political incompetent, promoted by Lost Cause and Jim Crow era historians. Like Whites book, Ron Chernows 2017 biography continued the elevation of Grants historical reputation. In a 2017 book review, former U.S. President Bill Clinton offered praise for Grant s significant achievements at the end of the war and after. Memorials and presidential library Grant National Memorial, known as Grants Tomb, largest mausoleum in North America Several memorials honor Grant. In addition to his mausoleum Grants Tomb in New York City there is the Ulysses S. Grant Memorial at the foot of Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C.Smithsonian Institution, Eassy, 2014 Created by sculptor Henry Merwin Shrady and architect Edward Pearce Casey, and dedicated in 1922, which overlooks the Capitol Reflecting Pool.Capitol Visiting Center, Washington D.C. In 2015, restoration work began, which is expected to be completed before the bicentennial of Grants birth in 2022. The Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site near St. Louis, and several other sites in Ohio and Illinois memorialize Grants life. There are smaller memorials in Chicagos Lincoln Park and Philadelphias Fairmount Park. Named in his honor are Grant Park, as well as several counties in western and midwestern states. On June 3, 1891, a bronze statue of Grant by Danish sculptor Johannes Gelert was dedicated at Grant Park in Galena, Illinois. From 1890 to 1940, part of what is now Kings Canyon National Park was called General Grant National Park , named for the General Grant sequoia. In May 2012, the Ulysses S. Grant Foundation, on the institutes fiftieth anniversary, selected Mississippi State University as the permanent location for Ulysses S. Grants presidential library.See website Historian John Y. Simon edited Grants letters into a 32volume scholarly edition published by Southern Illinois University Press.See Catalog . A search engine is at Ulysses S Grant Digital Collections at Mississippi State U Grant has appeared on the front of the United States fiftydollar bill since 1913. In 1921, the Ulysses S. Grant Centenary Association was founded with the goal of coordinating special observances and erecting monuments in recognition of Grants historical role. The venture was financed by the minting of 10,000 gold dollars and 250,000 half dollars. The coins were minted and issued in 1922, commemorating the 100th anniversary of Grants birth. Grant has also appeared on several U.S. postage stamps, the first one issued in 1890, five years after his death. See also Gallery of images of Ulysses S. Grant List of American Civil War battles List of American Civil War generals Grants Farm Notes References Works cited Biographical, political, and financial Military Primary sources Many editions in paper and online ends in 1865 Historiography External links Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site Missouri National Park Service Ulysses S. Grant Presidential Library Ulysses S. Grant A Resource Guide Library of Congress Biographical essays on Ulysses S. Grant, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs VideoLife Portrait of Ulysses S. Grant, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , July 12, 1999 Ulysses S. Grant Personal Manuscripts Category1822 births Category1885 deaths Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury American writers Category19thcentury Methodists CategoryAmerican memoirists CategoryAmerican Methodists CategoryAmerican military personnel of the Mexican American War CategoryAmerican Odd Fellows CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican slave owners CategoryCongressional Gold Medal recipients CategoryDeaths from cancer in New York CategoryDeaths from throat cancer CategoryFreemen of the City of London CategoryGeorge Washington University trustee CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryMembers of the Aztec Club of 1847 CategoryPeople from Clermont County, Ohio CategoryPeople of the Reconstruction Era CategoryPeople of Illinois in the American Civil War CategoryPresidents of the National Rifle Association CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryUnion Army generals CategoryUnited States Military Academy alumni CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1868 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1872 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates,1880
Warren Gamaliel Harding was the 29th President of the United States, serving from March 4, 1921, until his death in 1923. At the time of his death, he was one of the most popular presidents, but the subsequent exposure of scandals that took place under his administration, such as Teapot Dome, eroded his popular regard, as did revelations of an affair by Nan Britton, one of his mistresses. In historical rankings of the U.S. presidents, Harding is often rated among the worst. Harding was born in Blooming Grove, Ohio. He lived in rural Ohio all his life, except when political service took him elsewhere. He settled in Marion when not yet 20 years old and bought The Marion Star , building it into a successful newspaper. In 1899, he was elected to the Ohio State Senate and, after four years there, successfully ran for lieutenant governor. He was defeated for governor in 1910, but was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1914. When Harding ran for the Republican nomination for president in 1920 he was considered a long shot until after the convention began. Then the leading candidates, such as General Leonard Wood, could not gain the needed majority, and the convention deadlocked. Hardings support gradually grew until he was nominated on the 10th ballot. He conducted a front porch campaign, remaining for the most part in Marion and allowing the people to come to him. He won in a landslide over Democrat James M. Cox and Socialist Party candidate Eugene Debs, running on a theme of return to normalcy and becoming the first sitting senator to be elected president. Harding appointed a number of wellregarded figures to his cabinet, including Andrew Mellon at the Treasury, Herbert Hoover at Commerce and Charles Evans Hughes at the State Department. A major foreign policy achievement came with the Washington Naval Conference of 1921 1922, in which the worlds major naval powers agreed on a naval limitations program that lasted a decade. Two members of his cabinet were implicated in corruption Interior Secretary Albert Fall and Attorney General Harry Daugherty. The resulting scandals did not fully emerge until after Hardings death, nor did word of his extramarital affairs, but both greatly damaged his reputation. Harding died of a heart attack in San Francisco while on a western speaking tour he was succeeded by his vice president, Calvin Coolidge. Early life and career Childhood home in Caledonia Childhood and education Harding was born November 2, 1865, in Blooming Grove, Ohio. Nicknamed Winnie as a small child, Harding was the eldest of eight children born to George Tryon Harding and Phoebe Elizabeth Harding . Phoebe was a statelicensed midwife. Tryon farmed and taught school near Mount Gilead, Ohio. Through apprenticeship, study and a year of medical school, Tryon became a doctor and started a small practice. Some of Hardings mothers ancestors were Dutch, including the wellknown Van Kirk family. Harding also had ancestors from England, Wales and Scotland.The New England Historical and Genealogical Register, Volumes 76 77. October 1923, p. 244 It was rumored by a political opponent in Blooming Grove that one of Hardings greatgrandmothers was African American. His greatgreat grandfather Amos Harding claimed that a thief, who had been caught in the act by the family, started the rumor in an attempt at extortion or revenge. After Warren Hardings death in 1923, some African Americans continued to claim he had black ethnicity. This issue was resolved in 2015. Genetic testing of Hardings descendants determined, with more than a 95 chance of accuracy, that he lacked subSaharan African forebears within four generations. The Harding family, who were abolitionists, moved to Caledonia, Ohio, where Tryon acquired The Argus , a local weekly newspaper. At The Argus , Harding, from the age of 11, learned the basics of the newspaper business. In late 1879, at the age of 14, Harding enrolled at his fathers alma mater Ohio Central College in Iberia where he proved an adept student. He and a friend put out a small newspaper, the Iberia Spectator , during their final year at Ohio Central, intended to appeal to both college and town. During his final year, the Harding family moved to Marion, Ohio, about from Caledonia, and when he graduated in 1882, he joined them there. Editor Harding, c. 1882 In Hardings youth, the majority of the population still lived on farms and in small towns. He would spend much of his life in Marion, a small city in rural Ohio, and would become closely associated with it. When Harding rose to high office, he made clear his love of Marion and its way of life, telling of the many young Marionites who had left and enjoyed success elsewhere, while suggesting that the man, once the pride of the school, who had remained behind and become a janitor, was the happiest one of the lot. Upon graduating, Harding had stints as a teacher and as an insurance man, and made a brief attempt at studying law. He then raised 300 in partnership with others to purchase a failing newspaper, The Marion Star , weakest of the growing citys three papers, and its only daily. The 18yearold Harding used the railroad pass that came with the paper to attend the 1884 Republican National Convention, where he hobnobbed with betterknown journalists and supported the presidential nominee, former Secretary of State James G. Blaine. Harding returned from Chicago to find that the paper had been reclaimed by the sheriff. During the election campaign, Harding worked for the Marion Democratic Mirror and was annoyed at having to praise the Democratic presidential nominee, New York Governor Grover Cleveland, who won the election. Afterward, with the financial aid of his father, the budding newspaperman redeemed the paper. Through the later years of the 1880s, Warren Harding built the Star . The city of Marion tended to vote Republican , but Marion County was Democratic. Accordingly, Harding adopted a tempered editorial stance, declaring the daily Star nonpartisan and circulating a weekly edition that was moderate Republican. This policy attracted advertisers and put the towns Republican weekly out of business. According to his biographer, Andrew Sinclair The population of Marion grew from 4,000 in 1880 to twice that in 1890, increasing to 12,000 by 1900. This growth helped the Star , and Harding did his best to promote the city, purchasing stock in many local enterprises. Although a few of these turned out badly, he was in general successful as an investor, leaving an estate of 850,000 in 1923. According to Harding biographer and former White House Counsel John Dean, Hardings civic influence was that of an activist who used his editorial page to effectively keep his nose and a prodding voice in all the towns public business. To date, Harding is the only U.S. president to have had journalism experience. He became an ardent supporter of Governor Joseph B. Foraker, a Republican. Harding first came to know Florence Kling, five years older than he, as the daughter of a local banker and developer. Amos Kling was a man accustomed to getting his way, but Harding attacked him relentlessly in the paper. Amos involved Florence in all his affairs, taking her to work from the time she could walk. As hardheaded as her father, Florence came into conflict with him after returning from music college. After she eloped with Pete deWolfe, and returned to Marion without deWolfe, but with an infant called Marshall, Amos agreed to raise the boy, but would not support Florence, who made a living as a piano teacher. One of her students was Hardings sister Charity. By 1886, Florence Kling had obtained a divorce, and she and Warren Harding were courting, though who was pursuing whom is uncertain, depending on who later told the story of their romance. A truce between the Klings was snuffed out by the budding match. Amos believed that the Hardings had African American blood, and was also offended by Hardings editorial stances. He started to spread rumors of Hardings supposed black heritage and encouraged local businessmen to boycott Hardings business interests. When Harding found out what Kling was doing, he warned Kling that he would beat the tar out of the little man if he didnt cease. The Hardings were married on July 8, 1891 The marriage produced no children. at their new home on Mount Vernon Avenue in Marion, which they had designed together in the Queen Anne style. Warren Harding affectionately called his wife the Duchess, based on a character in a serial from The New York Sun , in which the Duchess kept a close eye on the Duke and their money, running anything that required efficiency. Florence Harding became deeply involved in her husbands career, both at the Star and once he entered politics. Exhibiting her fathers determination and business sense, she helped turn the Star into a profitable enterprise through her tight management of the papers circulation department. She has been credited with helping Harding achieve more than he might have alone some have suggested that she pushed him all the way to the White House. Start in politics Shown on a 10 gold piece , Florence Harding pushed her husband Warren ahead in his career. Soon after purchasing the Star , Harding turned his attention to politics, supporting Foraker in his first successful bid for governor in 1885. Foraker was part of the war generation that challenged older Ohio Republicans, such as Senator John Sherman, for control of state politics. Harding, always a party loyalist, supported Foraker in the complex internecine warfare that was Ohio Republican politics. Harding was willing to tolerate Democrats, as necessary to a twoparty system, but had only contempt for those who bolted the Republican Party to join thirdparty movements. He was a delegate to the Republican state convention in 1888, at the age of 22, representing Marion County, and would be elected a delegate in most years until becoming president. Hardings success as an editor took a toll on his health. Five times between 1889 and 1901, he spent time at the Battle Creek Sanitorium for reasons Sinclair described as fatigue, overstrain, and nervous illnesses. Dean ties these visits to early occurrences of the heart ailment that would kill Harding in 1923. During one such absence from Marion, in 1894, the Star s business manager quit. Florence Harding took his place. She became her husbands top assistant at the Star on the business side, maintaining her role until the Hardings moved to Washington in 1915. Her assistance and competence allowed Warren Harding to travel to make speeches . Florence Harding made sure no cents escaped her sometimes sending Warren to the bank with a gallon bucket full in each hand and wrote of her husband, he does well when he listens to me and poorly when he does not. In 1892, Harding traveled to Washington, where he met Democratic Nebraska Congressman William Jennings Bryan, and listened to the Boy Orator of the Platte speak on the floor of the House of Representatives. Harding traveled to Chicagos Columbian Exposition in 1893. Both visits were without Florence. Democrats generally won Marion Countys offices when Harding ran for auditor in 1895, he lost, but did better than expected. The following year, Harding was one of many orators who spoke across Ohio as part of the campaign of the Republican presidential candidate, that states former governor, William McKinley. According to Dean, while working for McKinley Harding began making a name for himself through Ohio. Rising politician State senator Harding wished to try again for elective office. Though a longtime admirer of Foraker , he had been careful to maintain good relations with the party faction led by the states other U.S. senator, Mark Hanna, McKinleys political manager and chairman of the Republican National Committee . Both Foraker and Hanna supported Harding for state Senate in 1899 he gained the Republican nomination and was easily elected to a twoyear term. Harding began his four years as a state senator as a political unknown he ended them as one of the most popular figures in the Ohio Republican Party. He always appeared calm and displayed humility, characteristics that endeared him to fellow Republicans even as he passed them in his political rise. Legislative leaders consulted him on difficult problems. It was usual at that time for state senators in Ohio to serve only one term, but Harding gained renomination in 1901. After the assassination of McKinley in September , much of the appetite for politics was temporarily lost in Ohio. In November, Harding won a second term, more than doubling his margin of victory to 3,563 votes. Like most politicians of his time, Harding accepted that patronage and graft would be used to repay political favors. He arranged for his sister Mary to be appointed asa teacher at the Ohio School for the Blind, although there were betterqualified candidates. In another trade, he offered publicity in his newspaper in exchange for free railroad passes for himself and his family. According to Sinclair, it is doubtful that Harding ever thought there was anything dishonest in accepting the perquisites of position or office. Patronage and favors seemed the normal reward for party service in the days of Hanna. Soon after Hardings initial election as senator, he met Harry M. Daugherty, who would take a major role in his political career. A perennial candidate for office who served two terms in the state House of Representatives in the early 1890s, Daugherty had become a political fixer and lobbyist in the state capital of Columbus. After first meeting and talking with Harding, Daugherty commented, Gee, what a greatlooking President hed make. Ohio state leader In early 1903, Harding announced he would run for Governor of Ohio, prompted by the withdrawal of the leading candidate, Congressman Charles Dick. Hanna and George Cox felt that Harding was not electable due to his work with Foraker as the Progressive Era commenced, the public was starting to take a dimmer view of the trading of political favors and of bosses such as Cox. Accordingly, they persuaded Cleveland banker Myron T. Herrick, a friend of McKinleys, to run. Herrick was also betterplaced to take votes away from the likely Democratic candidate, reforming Cleveland Mayor Tom L. Johnson. With little chance at the gubernatorial nomination, Harding sought nomination as lieutenant governor, and both Herrick and Harding were nominated by acclamation. Foraker and Hanna both campaigned for what was dubbed the FourH ticket. Herrick and Harding won by overwhelming margins. Once he and Harding were inaugurated, Herrick made illadvised decisions that turned crucial Republican constituencies against him, alienating farmers by opposing the establishment of an agricultural college. On the other hand, according to Sinclair, Harding had little to do, and he did it very well. His responsibility to preside over the state Senate allowed him to increase his growing network of political contacts. Harding and others envisioned a successful gubernatorial run in 1905, but Herrick refused to stand aside. In early 1905, Harding announced he would accept nomination as governor if offered, but faced with the anger of leaders such as Cox, Foraker and Dick , announced he would seek no office in 1905. Herrick was defeated, but his new running mate, Andrew L. Harris, was elected, and succeeded as governor after five months in office on the death of Democrat John M. Pattison. One Republican official wrote to Harding, Arent you sorry Dick wouldnt let you run for Lieutenant Governor Senator Joseph B. Foraker in 1908, his final full year as senator before his reelection defeat In addition to helping pick a president, Ohio voters in 1908 were to choose the legislators who would decide whether to reelect Foraker. The senator had quarreled with President Roosevelt over the Brownsville Affair. Though Foraker had little chance of winning, he sought the Republican presidential nomination against his fellow Cincinnatian, Secretary of War William Howard Taft, who was Roosevelts chosen successor. On January 6, 1908, Hardings Star endorsed Foraker and upbraided Roosevelt for trying to destroy the senators career over a matter of conscience. On January 22, Harding in the Star reversed course and declared for Taft, deeming Foraker defeated. According to Sinclair, Hardings change to Taft was not... because he saw the light but because he felt the heat. Jumping on the Taft bandwagon allowed Harding to survive his patrons disaster Foraker failed to gain the presidential nomination, and was defeated for a third term as senator. Also helpful in saving Hardings career was the fact that he was popular with, and had done favors for, the more progressive forces that now controlled the Ohio Republican Party. Harding sought and gained the 1910 Republican gubernatorial nomination. At that time, the party was deeply divided between progressive and conservative wings, and could not defeat the united Democrats he lost the election to incumbent Judson Harmon. Harry Daugherty managed Hardings campaign, but the defeated candidate did not hold the loss against him. Despite the growing rift between them, both President Taft and former president Roosevelt came to Ohio to campaign for Harding, but their quarrels split the Republican Party and helped assure Hardings defeat. The party split grew, and in 1912, Taft and Roosevelt were rivals for the Republican nomination. The 1912 Republican National Convention was bitterly divided. At Tafts request, Harding gave a speech nominating the president, but the angry delegates were not receptive to Hardings oratory. Taft was renominated, but Roosevelt supporters bolted the party. Harding, as a loyal Republican, supported Taft. The Republican vote was split between Taft, the partys official candidate, and Roosevelt, running under the label of the Progressive Party. This allowed the Democratic candidate, New Jersey Governor Woodrow Wilson, to be elected. U.S. senator Election of 1914 Congressman Theodore Burton had been elected as senator in Forakers place in 1909, and announced that he would seek a second term in the 1914 elections. By this time, the Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution had been ratified, giving the people the right to elect senators, and Ohio had instituted primary elections for the office. Foraker and former congressman Ralph D. Cole also entered the Republican primary. When Burton withdrew, Foraker became the favorite, but his Old Guard Republicanism was deemed outdated, and Harding was urged to enter the race. Daugherty claimed credit for persuading Harding to run, I found him like a turtle sunning himself on a log, and I pushed him into the water. According to Harding biographer Randolph Downes, he put on a campaign of such sweetness and light as would have won the plaudits of the angels. It was calculated to offend nobody except Democrats. Although Harding did not attack Foraker, his supporters had no such scruples. Harding won the primary by 12,000 votes over Foraker. Hardings general election opponent was Ohio Attorney General Timothy Hogan, who had risen to statewide office despite widespread prejudice against Roman Catholics in rural areas. In 1914, the start of World War I and the prospect of a Catholic senator from Ohio increased nativist sentiment. Propaganda sheets with names like The Menace and The Defender contained warnings that Hogan was the vanguard in a plot led by Pope Benedict XV through the Knights of Columbus to control Ohio. Harding did not attack Hogan on this or most other issues, but he did not denounce the nativist hatred for his opponent. Hardings conciliatory campaigning style aided him one Harding friend deemed the candidates stump speech during the 1914 fall campaign as a rambling, highsounding mixture of platitudes, patriotism, and pure nonsense. Dean notes, Harding used his oratory to good effect it got him elected, making as few enemies as possible in the process. Harding won by over 100,000 votes in a landslide that also swept into office a Republican governor, Frank B. Willis. Junior senator When Harding joined the U.S. Senate, the Democrats controlled both houses of Congress, and were led by President Wilson. As a junior senator in the minority, Harding received unimportant committee assignments, but carried out those duties assiduously. He was a safe, conservative, Republican vote. As during his time in the Ohio Senate, Harding came to be widely liked. On two issues, womens suffrage, and the prohibition of alcohol, where picking the wrong side would have damaged his presidential prospects in 1920, he prospered by taking nuanced positions. As senatorelect, he indicated that he could not support votes for women until Ohio did. Increased support for suffrage there and among Senate Republicans meant that by the time Congress voted on the issue, Harding was a firm supporter. Harding, who drank, initially voted against banning alcohol. He voted for the Eighteenth Amendment, which imposed Prohibition, after successfully moving to modify it by placing a time limit on ratification, which was expected to kill it. Once it was ratified anyway, Harding voted to override Wilsons veto of the Volstead Bill, which implemented the amendment, assuring the support of the AntiSaloon League. Harding, as a politician respected by both Republicans and Progressives, was asked to be temporary chairman of the 1916 Republican National Convention and to deliver the keynote address. He urged delegates to stand as a united party. The convention nominated Justice Charles Evans Hughes. Harding reached out to Roosevelt once the former president declined the 1916 Progressive nomination, a refusal that effectively scuttled that party. In the November 1916 presidential election, despite increasing Republican unity, Hughes was narrowly defeated by Wilson. Harding spoke and voted in favor of the resolution of war requested by Wilson in April 1917 that plunged the United States into World War I. In August, Harding argued for giving Wilson almost dictatorial powers, stating that democracy had little place in time of war. Harding voted for most war legislation, including the Espionage Act of 1917, which restricted civil liberties, though he opposed the excess profits tax as antibusiness. In May 1918, Harding, less enthusiastic about Wilson, opposed a bill to expand the presidents powers. In the 1918 midterm congressional elections, held just before the armistice, Republicans narrowly took control of the Senate. Harding was appointed to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Wilson took no senators with him to the Paris Peace Conference, confident that he could force what became the Treaty of Versailles through the Senate by appealing to the people. When he returned with a single treaty establishing both peace and a League of Nations, the country was overwhelmingly on his side. Many senators disliked Article X of the League Covenant, that committed signatories to the defense of any member nation that was attacked, seeing it as forcing the United States to war without the assent of Congress. Harding was one of 39 senators who signed a roundrobin letter opposing the League. When Wilson invited the Foreign Relations Committee to the White House to informally discuss the treaty, Harding ably questioned Wilson about Article X the president evaded his inquiries. The Senate debated Versailles in September 1919, and Harding made a major speech against it. By then, Wilson had suffered a stroke while on a speaking tour. With an incapacitated President in the White House and less support in the country, the treaty was defeated. Presidential election of 1920 Primary campaign Warren G. Harding c. 1919 With most Progressives having rejoined the Republican Party, their former leader, Theodore Roosevelt, was deemed likely to make a third run for the White House in 1920, and was the overwhelming favorite for the Republican nomination. These plans ended when Roosevelt suddenly died on January 6, 1919. A number of candidates quickly emerged, including General Leonard Wood, Illinois Governor Frank Lowden, California Senator Hiram Johnson, and a host of relatively minor possibilities such as Herbert Hoover , Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge, and General John J. Pershing. Harding, while he wanted to be president, was as much motivated in entering the race by his desire to keep control of Ohio Republican politics, enabling his reelection to the Senate in 1920. Among those coveting Hardings seat were former governor Willis and Colonel William Cooper Procter . On December 17, 1919, Harding made a lowkey announcement of his presidential candidacy. Leading Republicans disliked Wood and Johnson, both of the progressive faction of the party, and Lowden, who had an independent streak, was deemed little better. Harding was far more acceptable to the Old Guard leaders of the party. Daugherty, who became Hardings campaign manager, was sure none of the other candidates could garner a majority. His strategy was to make Harding an acceptable choice to delegates once the leaders faltered. Daugherty established a Harding for President campaign office in Washington , and worked to manage a network of Harding friends and supporters, including Frank Scobey of Texas . Harding worked to shore up his support through incessant letterwriting. Despite the candidates work, according to Russell, without Daughertys Mephistophelean efforts, Harding would never have stumbled forward to the nomination. There were only 16 presidential primary states in 1920, of which the most crucial to Harding was Ohio. Harding had to have some loyalists at the convention to have any chance of nomination, and the Wood campaign hoped to knock Harding out of the race by taking Ohio. Wood campaigned in the state, and his supporter, Procter, spent large sums Harding spoke in the nonconfrontational style he had adopted in 1914. Harding and Daugherty were so confident of sweeping Ohios 48 delegates that the candidate went on to the next state, Indiana, before the April 27 Ohio primary. Harding carried Ohio by only 15,000 votes over Wood, taking less than half the total vote, and won only 39 of 48 delegates. In Indiana, Harding finished fourth, with less than ten percent of the vote, and failed to win a single delegate. He was willing to give up and have Daugherty file his nomination papers for the Senate, but Florence Harding grabbed the phone from his hand, Warren Harding, what are you doing Give up Not until the convention is over. Think of your friends in Ohio On learning that Daugherty had left the phone line, the future First Lady retorted, Well, you tell Harry Daugherty for me that were in this fight until Hell freezes over. After he recovered from the shock of the poor results, Harding traveled to Boston, where he delivered a speech that according to Dean, would resonate throughout the 1920 campaign and history. There, he stated that Americas present need is not heroics, but healing not nostrums, but normalcy not revolution, but restoration. Dean notes, Harding, more than the other aspirants, was reading the nations pulse correctly. Convention The 1920 Republican National Convention opened at the Chicago Coliseum on June 8, 1920, assembling delegates who were bitterly divided, most recently over the results of a Senate investigation into campaign spending, which had just been released. That report found that Wood had spent 1.8 million, lending substance to Johnsons claims that Wood was trying to buy the presidency. Some of the 600,000 that Lowden had spent had wound up in the pockets of two convention delegates. Johnson had spent 194,000 and Harding 113,000. Johnson was deemed to be behind the inquiry, and the rage of the Lowden and Wood factions put an end to any possible compromise among the frontrunners. Of the almost 1,000 delegates, 27 were women the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, guaranteeing women the vote, was within one state of ratification, and would pass before the end of August. The convention had no boss, most uninstructed delegates voted as they pleased, and with a Democrat in the White House, the partys leaders could not use patronage to get their way. Reporters deemed Harding unlikely to be nominated due to his poor showing in the primaries, and relegated him to a place among the dark horses. Harding, who like the other candidates was in Chicago supervising his campaign, had finished sixth in the final public opinion poll, behind the three main candidates as well as former justice Hughes and Herbert Hoover, and only slightly ahead of Coolidge. After the convention dealt with other matters, the nominations for president opened on the morning of Friday, June 11. Harding had asked Willis to place his name in nomination, and the former governor responded with a speech popular among the delegates both for its folksiness and for its brevity in the intense Chicago heat. Reporter Mark Sullivan, who was present, called it a splendid combination of oratory, grand opera, and hog calling. Willis confided, leaning over the podium railing, Say, boys and girls too why not name Warren Harding The laughter and applause that followed created a warm feeling for Harding. Four ballots were taken on the afternoon of June 11, and they revealed a deadlock. With 493 votes needed to nominate, Wood was the closest with 314 Lowdon had 289. The best Harding had done was 65. Chairman Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, the Senate Majority Leader, adjourned the convention about 7p.m. The night of June 11 12, 1920 would become famous in political history as the night of the smokefilled room, in which, legend has it, party elders agreed to force the convention to nominate Harding. Historians have focused on the talks held in the suite of Republican National Committee Chairman Will Hays at the Blackstone Hotel, at which senators and others came and went, and numerous possible candidates were discussed. Utah Senator Reed Smoot, before his departure early in the evening, backed Harding, telling Hays and the others that as the Democrats were likely to nominate Governor Cox, they should pick Harding to win Ohio. Smoot also told The New York Times that there had been an agreement to nominate Harding, but that it would not be done for several ballots yet. This was not true a number of participants backed Harding , but there was no pact to nominate him, and the senators had little power to enforce any agreement. Two other participants in the smokefilled room discussions, Kansas Senator Charles Curtis and Colonel George Brinton McClellan Harvey, a close friend of Hays, predicted to the press that Harding would be nominated because of the liabilities of the other candidates. Colonel Harveys account of the smokefilled room had Harding being sent for in the early morning hours, to be informed by Harvey that the Ohioan would be the candidate. Harvey stated he asked if there was anything in Hardings background that might harm his candidacy, to which the senator, who had had at least one extramarital affair, replied there was not. Harding biographer Charles W. Murray noted that there is no evidence besides Harveys word that Harding went to the Hays suite that night, and that other participants denied that Harding was there. Harding was so uncertain of victory that he filed for reelection to the Senate, though Daugherty continued to urge delegates to support him. The reassembled delegates had heard rumors that Harding was the choice of a cabal of senators. Although this was not true, delegates believed it, and sought a way out by voting for Harding. When balloting resumed on the morning of June 12, Harding gained votes on each of the next four ballots, rising to 133 as the two frontrunners saw little change. Lodge then declared a threehour recess, to the outrage of Daugherty, who raced to the podium and confronted him, You cannot defeat this man this way The motion was not carried You cannot defeat this man Lodge and others used the break to try to stop the Harding momentum and make RNC Chairman Hays the nominee, a scheme Hays refused to have anything to do with. The ninth ballot, after some initial suspense, saw delegation after delegation break for Harding, who took the lead with 374 votes to 249 for Wood and 121 for Lowden . Lowden released his delegates to Harding, and the tenth ballot, held at 6p.m., was a mere formality, with Harding finishing with 672 votes to 156 for Wood. The nomination was made unanimous. The delegates, desperate to leave town before they incurred more hotel expenses, then proceeded to the vice presidential nomination. Harding wanted Senator Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsin, who was unwilling to run, but before Lenroots name could be withdrawn and another man decided on, an Oregon delegate proposed Governor Coolidge, which was met with a roar of approval from the delegates. Coolidge, popular for his role in breaking the Boston police strike of 1919, was nominated for vice president, receiving two and a fraction votes more than Harding had. James Morgan wrote in The Boston Globe The delegates would not listen to remaining in Chicago over Sunday... the President makers did not have a clean shirt. On such things, Rollo, turns the destiny of nations. General election campaign Harding begins his front porch campaign by accepting the Republican nomination, July 22, 1920. The HardingCoolidge ticket was quickly backed by Republican newspapers, but those of other viewpoints expressed disappointment. The New York World found Harding the leastqualified candidate since James Buchanan, deeming the Ohio senator a weak and mediocre man who never had an original idea. The Hearst newspapers called Harding the flagbearer of a new Senatorial autocracy. The New York Times described the Republican presidential candidate as a very respectable Ohio politician of the second class. The Democratic National Convention opened in San Francisco on June 28, 1920, under a shadow cast by Woodrow Wilson, who wished to be nominated for a third term. Delegates were convinced Wilsons health would not permit him to serve, and looked elsewhere for a candidate. Former Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo was a major contender, but he was Wilsons soninlaw, and refused to consider a nomination so long as the president wanted it. Many at the convention voted for McAdoo anyway, and a deadlock ensued with Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer. On the 44thballot, the Democrats nominated Governor Cox for president, with his running mate Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt. As Cox was, when not in politics, a newspaper owner and editor, this placed two Ohio editors against each other for the presidency, and some complained there was no real political choice. Both Cox and Harding were economic conservatives, and were reluctant progressives at best. How Does He Do It In this Clifford Berryman cartoon, Harding and Cox ponder another big story of 1920 Babe Ruths recordsetting home run pace. Harding elected to conduct a front porch campaign, like McKinley in 1896. Some years earlier, Harding had had his front porch remodeled to resemble McKinleys, which his neighbors felt signified presidential ambitions. The candidate remained at home in Marion and gave addresses to visiting delegations. In the meantime, Cox and Roosevelt stumped the nation, giving hundreds of speeches. Coolidge spoke in the Northeast, later on in the South, and was not a significant factor in the election. In Marion, Harding ran his campaign. As a newspaperman himself, he fell into easy camaraderie with the press covering him, enjoying a relationship few presidents have equaled. His Return to Normalcy theme was aided by the atmosphere that Marion provided, an orderly place that induced nostalgia in many voters. The front porch campaign allowed Harding to avoid mistakes, and as time dwindled towards the election, his strength grew. The travels of the Democratic candidates eventually caused Harding to make several short speaking tours, but for the most part, he remained in Marion. America had no need for another Wilson, Harding argued, appealing for a president near the normal. Democratic candidates Cox and Roosevelt at a campaign appearance in Washington, DC, 1920 Hardings vague oratory irritated some McAdoo described a typical Harding speech as an army of pompous phrases moving over the landscape in search of an idea. Sometimes these meandering words actually capture a straggling thought and bear it triumphantly, a prisoner in their midst, until it died of servitude and over work. H. L. Mencken concurred, it reminds me of a string of wet sponges, it reminds me of tattered washing on the line it reminds me of stale bean soup, of college yells, of dogs barking idiotically through endless nights. It is so bad that a kind of grandeur creeps into it. It drags itself out of the dark abysm... of pish, and crawls insanely up the topmost pinnacle of tosh. It is rumble and bumble. It is balder and dash. The New York Times took a more positive view of Hardings speeches, stating that in them the majority of people could find a reflection of their own indeterminate thoughts. Wilson had stated that the 1920 election would be a great and solemn referendum on the League of Nations, making it difficult for Cox to maneuver on the issue although Roosevelt strongly supported the League, Cox was less enthusiastic. Harding opposed entry into the League of Nations as negotiated by Wilson, but favored an association of nations, based on the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague. This was general enough to satisfy most Republicans, and only a few bolted the party over this issue. By October, Cox had realized there was widespread public opposition to Article X, and stated that reservations to the treaty might be necessary this shift allowed Harding to say no more on the subject. Warren G. Harding campaigning in 1920 The RNC hired Albert Lasker, an advertising executive from Chicago, to publicize Harding, and Lasker unleashed a broadbased advertising campaign that used many nowstandard advertising techniques for the first time in a presidential campaign. Laskers approach included newsreels and sound recordings. Visitors to Marion had their photographs taken with Senator and Mrs. Harding, and copies were sent to their hometown newspapers. Billboard posters, newspapers and magazines were employed in addition to motion pictures. Telemarketers were used to make phone calls with scripted dialogues to promote Harding. During the campaign, opponents spread old rumors that Hardings greatgreatgrandfather was a West Indian black person and that other blacks might be found in his family tree. Hardings campaign manager rejected the accusations. Wooster College professor William Estabrook Chancellor publicized the rumors, based on supposed family research, but perhaps reflecting no more than local gossip. 1920 electoral vote results By Election Day, November 2, 1920, few had any doubts that the Republican ticket would win. Harding received 60.2percent of the popular vote, the highest percentage since the evolution of the twoparty system, and 404 electoral votes. Cox received 34percent of the national vote and 127 electoral votes. Campaigning from a federal prison where he was serving a sentence for opposing the war, Socialist Eugene V. Debs received 3percent of the national vote. The Republicans greatly increased their majority in each house of Congress. President President Warren G. Harding1921 1923Official White House Portrait Inauguration and appointments Warren Harding was sworn in as president on March 4, 1921, in the presence of his wife and father. Harding preferred a lowkey inauguration, without the customary parade, leaving only the swearingin ceremony and a brief reception at the White House. In his inaugural address he declared, Our most dangerous tendency is to expect too much from the government and at the same time do too little for it. After the election, Harding had announced he was going on vacation, and that no decisions about appointments would be made until he returned to Marion in December. He went to Texas, where he fished and played golf with his friend Frank Scobey , then took ship for the Panama Canal Zone. He went to Washington, where he was given a heros welcome when Congress opened in early December as the first sitting senator to be elected to the White House. Back in Ohio, he planned to consult the best minds of the country on appointments, and they dutifully journeyed to Marion to offer their counsel. Harding chose proLeague Charles Evans Hughes as his Secretary of State, ignoring advice from Senator Lodge and others. After Charles G. Dawes declined the Treasury position, Harding asked Pittsburgh banker Andrew W. Mellon, one of the richest men in the country he agreed. Harding appointed Herbert Hoover as United States Secretary of Commerce. RNC Chairman Will Hays was made Postmaster General, then a cabinet post he would leave after a year in the position to become chief censor to the motion picture industry. The two Harding cabinet appointees who darkened the reputation of his administration for their involvement in scandal were Hardings Senate friend, Albert B. Fall of New Mexico, the Interior Secretary, and Daugherty, who became Attorney General. Fall was a Western rancher and former miner, and was prodevelopment. He was opposed by conservationists such as Gifford Pinchot, who wrote, it would have been possible to pick a worse man for Secretary of the Interior, but not altogether easy. The New York Times mocked the Daugherty appointment, stating that rather than select one of the best minds, Harding had been content to choose merely a best friend. Eugene P. Trani and David L. Wilson, in their volume on Hardings presidency, suggest that the appointment made sense then, since Daugherty was a competent lawyer wellacquainted with the seamy side of politics... a firstclass political troubleshooter and someone Harding could trust. Inauguration of Warren G. Harding, March 4, 1921 President Hardings original Cabinet, 1921 Foreign policy European relations and formally ending the war Harding made it clear when he appointed Hughes as Secretary of State that the former justice would run foreign policy, a change from Wilsons close management of international affairs. Hughes had to work within some broad outlines after taking office, Harding hardened his stance on the League of Nations, deciding the U.S. would not join even a scaleddown version of the League. With the Treaty of Versailles unratified by the Senate, the U.S. remained technically at war with Germany, Austria, and Hungary. Peacemaking began with the Knox Porter Resolution, declaring the U.S. at peace and reserving any rights granted under Versailles. Treaties with Germany, Austria and Hungary, each containing many of the nonLeague provisions of the Treaty of Versailles, were ratified in 1921. This still left the question of relations between the U.S. and the League. Hughes State Department initially ignored communications from the League, or tried to bypass it through direct communications with member nations. By 1922, though, the U.S., through its consul in Geneva, was dealing with the League, and though the U.S. refused to participate in any meeting with political implications, it sent observers to sessions on technical and humanitarian matters. By the time Harding took office, there were calls from foreign governments for reduction of the massive war debt owed to the United States, and the German government sought to reduce the reparations that it was required to pay. The U.S. refused to consider any multilateral settlement. Harding sought passage of a plan proposed by Mellon to give the administration broad authority to reduce war debts in negotiation, but Congress, in 1922, passed a more restrictive bill. Hughes negotiated an agreement for Britain to pay off its war debt over 62 years at low interest, effectively reducing the present value of the obligations. This agreement, approved by Congress in 1923, set a pattern for negotiations with other nations. Talks with Germany on reduction of reparations payments would result in the Dawes Plan of 1924. A pressing issue not resolved by Wilson was the question of policy towards Bolshevik Russia. The U.S. had been among the nations that had sent troops there after the Russian Revolution. Afterwards, Wilson refused to recognize the Russian SFSR. Under Harding, Commerce Secretary Hoover, with considerable experience of Russian affairs, took the lead on policy. When famine struck Russia in 1921, Hoover had the American Relief Administration, which he had headed, negotiate with the Russians to provide aid. Soviet leaders hoped in vain that the agreement would lead to recognition. Hoover supported trade with the Soviets, fearing U.S. companies would be frozen out of the Soviet market, but Hughes opposed this, and the matter was not resolved under Hardings presidency. Disarmament Charles Evans Hughes, former Supreme Court justice and Hardings Secretary of State Harding had urged disarmament and lower defense costs during the campaign, but it had not been a major issue. He gave a speech to a joint session of Congress in April 1921, setting out his legislative priorities. Among the few foreign policy matters he mentioned was disarmament, with the president stating that the government could not be unmindful of the call for reduced expenditure on defense. Idaho Senator William Borah had proposed a conference at which the major naval powers, the U.S., Britain, and Japan, would agree to cuts in their fleets. Harding concurred, and after some diplomatic discussions, representatives of nine nations convened in Washington in November 1921. Most of the diplomats first attended Armistice Day ceremonies at Arlington National Cemetery, where Harding spoke at the entombment of the Unknown Soldier of World War I, whose identity, took flight with his imperishable soul. We know not whence he came, only that his death marks him with the everlasting glory of an American dying for his country. Hughes, in his speech at the opening session of the conference on November 12, 1921, made the American proposal the U.S would decommission or not build 30 warships if Great Britain did the same for 19 vessels, and Japan 17 ships. The secretary was generally successful, and agreements were reached on this and other points, including settlements to disputes over islands in the Pacific, and limitations on the use of poison gas. The naval agreement was limited to battleships and to some extent aircraft carriers, and in the end did not prevent rearmament. Nevertheless, Harding and Hughes were widely applauded in the press for their work. Harding had appointed Senator Lodge and the Senate Minority Leader, Alabamas Oscar Underwood, to the U.S. delegation they helped ensure that the treaties made it through the Senate mostly unscathed, though that body added reservations to some of the treaties. The U.S. had acquired over a thousand vessels during World War I, and still owned most of them when Harding took office. Congress had authorized their disposal in 1920, but the Senate would not confirm Wilsons nominees to the Shipping Board. Harding appointed Albert Lasker as its chairman the advertising executive undertook to run the fleet as profitably as possible until it could be sold. Most ships proved impossible to sell at anything approaching the governments cost. Lasker recommended a large subsidy to the merchant marine to enable the sales, and Harding repeatedly urged Congress to enact it. Unpopular in the Midwest, the bill passed the House but was defeated by a filibuster in the Senate, and most government ships were eventually scrapped. Latin America Intervention in Latin America had been a minor campaign issue Harding spoke against Wilsons decision to send U.S. troops to the Dominican Republic and Haiti, and attacked the Democratic vice presidential candidate, Franklin Roosevelt, for his role in the Haitian intervention. Once Harding was sworn in, Hughes worked to improve relations with Latin American countries who were wary of the American use of the Monroe Doctrine to justify intervention at the time of Hardings inauguration, the U.S. also had troops in Cuba and Nicaragua. The troops stationed in Cuba to protect American interests were withdrawn in 1921 U.S. forces remained in the other three nations through Hardings presidency. In April 1921, Harding gained the ratification of the Thomson Urrutia Treaty with Colombia, granting that nation 25,000,000 as settlement for the U.S.provoked Panamanian revolution of 1903. The Latin American nations were not fully satisfied, as the U.S. refused to renounce interventionism, though Hughes pledged to limit it to nations near the Panama Canal and to make it clear what the U.S. aims were. The U.S. had intervened repeatedly in Mexico under Wilson, and had withdrawn diplomatic recognition, setting conditions for reinstatement. The Mexican government under President lvaro Obregn wanted recognition before negotiations, but Wilson and his final Secretary of State, Bainbridge Colby, refused. Both Hughes and Fall opposed recognition Hughes instead sent a draft treaty to the Mexicans in May 1921, which included pledges to reimburse Americans for losses in Mexico since the 1910 revolution there. Obregn was unwilling to sign a treaty before being recognized, and worked to improve the relationship between American business and Mexico, reaching agreement with creditors, and mounting a public relations campaign in the United States. This had its effect, and by mid1922, Fall was less influential than he had been, lessening the resistance to recognition. The two presidents appointed commissioners to reach a deal, and the U.S. recognized the Obregn government on August 31, 1923, just under a month after Hardings death, substantially on the terms proffered by Mexico. Domestic policy Postwar recession and recovery Charles Dawes the first budget director and later, vice president under Coolidge When Harding took office on March 4, 1921, the nation was in the midst of a postwar economic decline. At the suggestion of its leaders, Harding called a special session of Congress to convene on April 11. When Harding addressed the joint session the following day, he urged the reduction of income taxes , an increase in tariffs on agricultural goods to protect the American farmer, as well as more wideranging reforms, such as support for highways, aviation, and radio. But it was not until May 27 that Congress passed an emergency tariff increase on agricultural products. An act authorizing a Bureau of the Budget followed on June 10 Harding appointed Charles Dawes as bureau director with a mandate to cut expenditures. Mellons tax cuts Treasury Secretary Mellon also recommended to Congress that income tax rates be cut. He asked that the excess profits tax on corporations be abolished. The House Ways and Means Committee endorsed Mellons proposals, but some congressmen, who wanted to raise tax rates on corporations, fought the measure. Harding was unsure what side to endorse, telling a friend, I cant make a damn thing out of this tax problem. I listen to one side, and they seem right, and then God I talk to the other side, and they seem just as right. Harding tried compromise, and gained passage of the bill in the House after the end of the excess profits tax was delayed a year. In the Senate, the tax bill became entangled in efforts to vote World War I veterans a soldiers bonus. Frustrated by the delays, on July 12, Harding appeared before the Senate and urged it to pass the tax legislation without the bonus. It was not until November that the revenue bill finally passed, with higher rates than Mellon had proposed. Secretary of the Treasury Andrew W. Mellon advocated lower tax rates. Harding had opposed payment of a bonus to veterans, arguing in his Senate address that much was already being done for them by a grateful nation, and that the bill would break down our Treasury, from which so much is later on to be expected. The Senate sent the bonus bill back to committee, but the issue returned when Congress reconvened in December 1921. A bill providing a bonus, without a means of funding it, was passed by both houses in September 1922. Harding vetoed it, and the veto was narrowly sustained. A bonus, not payable in cash, was voted to soldiers despite Coolidges veto in 1924. In his first annual message to Congress, Harding sought the power to adjust tariff rates. The passage of the tariff bill in the Senate, and in conference committee became a feeding frenzy of lobbyist interests. Harding, when he enacted the Fordney McCumber Tariff Act on September 21, 1922, made a brief signing statement, praising only that the bill gave him some power to adjust rates. According to Trani and Wilson, the bill was illconsidered. It wrought havoc in international commerce and made the repayment of war debts more difficult. Mellon ordered a study which demonstrated historically that, as income tax rates were increased, money was driven underground or abroad. He concluded that lower rates would increase tax revenues. Based on his advice, Hardings revenue bill cut taxes, starting in 1922. The top marginal rate was reduced annually in four stages from 73 in 1921 to 25 in 1925. Taxes were cut for lower incomes starting in 1923. The lower rates substantially increased the money flowing to the treasury. They also pushed massive deregulation and federal spending as a share of GDP fell from 6.5 to 3.5. By late 1922 the economy began to turn around. Unemployment was pared from its 1921 high of 12 to an average of 3.3 for the remainder of the decade. The misery index which is a combination of unemployment and inflation had its sharpest decline in U.S. history under Harding. Wages, profits, and productivity all made substantial gains annual GDP increases averaged at over 5 during the 1920s. Libertarian historians Larry Schweikart and Michael Allen argue that, Mellons tax policies set the stage for the most amazing growth yet seen in Americas already impressive economy.Larry Schweikart and Michael Allen, A patriots history of the United States From Columbuss great discovery to the war on terror p. 536. Embracing new technologies The 1920s were a time of modernization for America. Use of electricity became increasingly common. Mass production of the motor car stimulated other industries, as well, such as highway construction, rubber, steel, and building, as hotels were erected to accommodate the tourists venturing upon the roads. This economic boost helped bring the nation out of the recession. To improve and expand the nations highway system, Harding signed the Federal Highway Act of 1921. From 1921 to 1923, the federal government spent 162million on Americas highway system, infusing the U.S. economy with a large amount of capital. In 1922, Harding proclaimed that America was in the age of the motor car, which reflects our standard of living and gauges the speed of our presentday life. Harding had urged regulation of radio broadcasting in his April 1921 speech to Congress. Commerce Secretary Hoover took charge of this project, and convened a conference of radio broadcasters in 1922, which led to a voluntary agreement for licensing of radio frequencies through the Commerce Department. Both Harding and Hoover realized something more than an agreement was needed, but Congress was slow to act, not imposing radio regulation until 1927. Harding also wished to promote aviation, and Hoover again took the lead, convening a national conference on commercial aviation. The discussions focused on safety matters, inspection of airplanes, and licensing of pilots. Harding again promoted legislation but nothing was done until 1926, when the Air Commerce Act created the Bureau of Aeronautics within Hoovers Commerce Department. Business and labor Hardings attitude toward business was that government should aid it as much as possible. He was suspicious of organized labor, viewing it as a conspiracy against business. He sought to get them to work together at a conference on unemployment that he called to meet in September 1921 at Hoovers recommendation. Harding warned in his opening address that no federal money would be available. No important legislation came as a result, though some public works projects were accelerated. Within broad limits, Harding allowed each cabinet secretary to run his department as he saw fit. Hoover expanded the Commerce Department to make it more useful to business. This was consistent with Hoovers view that the private sector should take the lead in managing the economy. Harding greatly respected his Commerce Secretary, often asked his advice, and backed him to the hilt, calling Hoover the smartest gink I know Widespread strikes marked 1922, as labor sought redress for falling wages and increased unemployment. In April, 500,000 coal miners, led by John L. Lewis, struck over wage cuts. Mining executives argued that the industry was seeing hard times Lewis accused them of trying to break the union. As the strike became protracted, Harding offered compromise to settle it. As Harding proposed, the miners agreed to return to work, and Congress created a commission to look into their grievances. On July 1, 1922, 400,000 railroad workers went on strike. Harding proposed a settlement that made some concessions, but management objected. Attorney General Daugherty convinced Judge James H. Wilkerson to issue a sweeping injunction to break up the strike. Although there was public support for the Wilkerson injunction, Harding felt it went too far, and had Daugherty and Wilkerson amend it. The injunction succeeded in ending the strike however, tensions remained high between railroad workers and management for years. By 1922, the eighthour day had become common in American industry. One exception was in steel mills, where workers labored through a twelvehour workday, seven days a week. Hoover considered this practice barbaric, and got Harding to convene a conference of steel manufacturers with a view to ending it. The conference established a committee under the leadership of U. S. Steel chairman Elbert Gary, which in early 1923 recommended against ending the practice. Harding sent a letter to Gary deploring the result, which was printed in the press, and public outcry caused the manufacturers to reverse themselves and standardize the eighthour day. Civil rights and immigration Harding addresses the segregated crowd in Birmingham, October 26, 1921 Although Hardings first address to Congress called for passage of antilynching legislation, he initially seemed inclined to do no more for African Americans than Republican presidents of the recent past had he asked cabinet officers to find places for blacks in their departments. Sinclair suggested that the fact that Harding received twofifths of the Southern vote in 1920 led him to see political opportunity for his party in the Solid South. On October 26, 1921, Harding gave a speech in Birmingham, Alabama, to a segregated audience of 20,000 whites and 10,000 blacks. Harding, while stating that the social and racial differences between whites and blacks could not be bridged, urged equal political rights for the African American. Many African Americans at that time voted Republican, especially in the Democratic South, and Harding stated he did not mind seeing that support end if the result was a strong twoparty system in the South. He was willing to see literacy tests for voting continue, if applied fairly to white and black. Whether you like it or not, Harding told his segregated audience, unless our democracy is a lie, you must stand for that equality. The white section of the audience listened in silence while the black section cheered. Harding with Chief Justice Taft and Robert Lincoln at the dedication of the Lincoln Memorial, May 30, 1922 Harding had spoken out against lynching in his April 1921 speech before Congress and supported Congressman Leonidas Dyers federal antilynching bill, which passed the House of Representatives in January 1922. When it reached the Senate floor in November 1922, it was filibustered by Southern Democrats, and Lodge withdrew it so as to allow the ship subsidy bill Harding favored to be debated . Blacks blamed Harding for the Dyer bills defeat Harding biographer Robert K. Murray noted that it was hastened to its end by Hardings desire to have the ship subsidy bill considered. With the public suspicious of immigrants, especially those who might be socialists or communists, Congress passed the Per Centum Act of 1921, signed by Harding on May 19, 1921, as a quick means of restricting immigration. The act reduced the numbers of immigrants to 3 of those from a given country living in the U.S., based on the 1910 census. This would, in practice, not restrict immigration from Ireland and Germany, but would bar many Italians and eastern European Jews. Harding and Secretary of Labor James Davis believed that enforcement had to be humane, and at the secretarys recommendation, Harding allowed almost a thousand deportable immigrants to remain. Coolidge signed a bill permanently restricting immigration to the U.S. in 1924. Debs and political prisoners Hardings Socialist opponent in the 1920 election, Eugene Debs, was serving a tenyear sentence in the Atlanta Penitentiary for speaking against the war. Wilson had refused to pardon him before leaving office. Daugherty met with Debs, and was deeply impressed. There was opposition from veterans, including the American Legion, and also from Florence Harding. The president did not feel he could release Debs until the war was officially over, but once the peace treaties were signed commuted Debs sentence on December 23, 1921. At Hardings request, Debs visited the president at the White House before going home to Indiana. Harding released 23 other war opponents at the same time as Debs, and continued to review cases and release political prisoners throughout his presidency. Harding defended his prisoner releases as necessary to return the nation to normalcy. Judicial appointments Harding appointed four justices to the Supreme Court of the United States. When Chief Justice Edward Douglass White died in May 1921, Harding was unsure whether to appoint former president Taft or former Utah senator George Sutherland he had promised seats on the court to both men. After briefly considering awaiting another vacancy and appointing them both, he chose Taft as chief justice. Sutherland was appointed to the court in 1922, to be followed by two other economic conservatives, Pierce Butler and Edward Terry Sanford, in 1923. Harding also appointed six judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, 42 judges to the United States district courts, and two judges to the United States Court of Customs Appeals. Searches run from page by choosing select research categories then check court type and nominating president, then select type of court and Warren G. Harding. Final months, death, and funeral Political setbacks and western tour Harding aboard the presidential train in Alaska, with secretaries Hoover, Wallace, Work, and Mrs. Harding Entering the 1922 midterm congressional election campaign, Harding and the Republicans had followed through on many of their campaign promises. But some of the fulfilled pledges, like cutting taxes for the welloff, did not appeal to the electorate. The economy had not returned to normalcy, with unemployment at 11percent, and organized labor angry over the outcome of the strikes. From 303 Republicans elected to the House in 1920, the new 68th Congress would see that party fall to a 221 213 majority. In the Senate, the Republicans lost eight seats, and had 51 of 96 senators in the new Congress, which Harding did not survive to meet. A month after the election, the lameduck session of the old 67th Congress met. Harding had come to believe that his early view of the presidency that it should propose policies, but leave whether to adopt them to Congress was not enough, and he lobbied Congress, although in vain, to get his ship subsidy bill through. Once Congress left town in early March 1923, Hardings popularity in the country began to recover. The economy was improving, and the programs of Hardings more able cabinet members, such as Hughes, Mellon, and Hoover, were showing results. Most Republicans realized that there was no practical alternative to supporting Harding in 1924. In the first half of 1923, Harding did two acts that were later said to indicate foreknowledge of death he sold the Star , and made a new will. Harding had long suffered occasional health problems, but when he was not experiencing symptoms he tended to eat, drink, and smoke too much. By 1919, he was aware he had a heart condition. Stress caused by the presidency and by Florence Hardings illhealth debilitated him, and he never really recovered from an episode of influenza in January 1923. After that, Harding, an avid golfer, had difficulty completing a round. In June 1923, Ohio Senator Willis met with Harding, but brought to the presidents attention only two of the five items he intended to discuss. When asked why, Willis responded, Warren seemed so tired. In June 1923, Harding set out on a journey, which he dubbed the Voyage of Understanding. The president planned to cross the country, go north to Alaska Territory, journey south along the West Coast, then travel by Navy ship through the Panama Canal, to Puerto Rico, and to return to Washington at the end of August. Harding loved to travel and had long contemplated a trip to Alaska. The trip would allow him to speak widely across the country, to politic and bloviate in advance of the 1924 campaign, and allow him some rest away from Washingtons oppressive summer heat. Hardings political advisers had given him a physically demanding schedule, even though the president had ordered it cut back. In Kansas City, Harding spoke on transportation issues in Hutchinson, Kansas, agriculture was the theme. In Denver, he spoke on Prohibition, and continued west making a series of speeches not matched by any president until Franklin Roosevelt. Harding had become a supporter of the World Court, and wanted the U.S. to become a member. In addition to making speeches, he visited Yellowstone and Zion National Parks, and dedicated a monument on the Oregon Trail at a celebration organized by venerable pioneer Ezra Meeker and others. On July 5, Harding embarked on in Washington state. The first president to visit Alaska, he spent hours watching the dramatic landscapes from the deck of the Henderson . After several stops along the coast, the presidential party left the ship at Seward to take the Alaska Central Railway to McKinley Park and Fairbanks, where he addressed a crowd of 1,500 in heat. The party was to return to Seward by the Richardson Trail but due to Hardings fatigue, it went by train. On July 26, 1923, Harding toured Vancouver, British Columbia as the first sitting American president to visit Canada. He was welcomed by the Premier of British Columbia and the Mayor of Vancouver and spoke to a crowd of over 50,000. Two years after his death a memorial to Harding was unveiled in Stanley Park. Harding visited a golf course, but completed only six holes before being fatigued. After resting, he played the 17th and 18th holes so it would appear he completed the round. He was not successful in hiding his exhaustion one reporter deemed him so tired a rest of mere days would not be sufficient to refresh him. In Seattle the next day, Harding kept up his busy schedule, giving a speech to 25,000 people at the stadium at the University of Washington. In the final speech he gave, Harding predicted statehood for Alaska. The president rushed through his speech, not waiting for applause by the audience. Death in San Francisco, funeral, and memorial The funeral procession for President Harding passes by the front of the White House. Harding went to bed early in the evening of July 27, 1923. Later that night, he called for his physician, Charles E. Sawyer, complaining of pain in the upper abdomen. Sawyer thought it was a recurrence of a dietary upset, but Dr. Joel T. Boone suspected a heart problem. The next day, as the train rushed to San Francisco, Harding felt better, and when they arrived on the morning of July 29, 1923, he insisted on walking from the train to the car, which rushed him to the Palace Hotel where he suffered a relapse. Doctors found that not only was Hardings heart causing problems, but he also had pneumonia, a serious matter in the days before effective antibiotics. When treated with caffeine and digitalis, Harding seemed to improve. He was pleased when his planned foreign policy address advocating membership in the World Court was released to the press by Hoover and received a favorable reception. By the afternoon of August 2, 1923, doctors allowed Harding to sit up in bed. That evening, about 730 pm, he was listening to his wife read him a flattering article about him from The Saturday Evening Post , A Calm Review of a Calm Man. When she paused to plump his pillows, he said, Thats good, read some more. As Florence Harding resumed, her husband twisted convulsively and collapsed, and she raced to get the doctors. They attempted stimulants, but were unable to revive him, and President Harding died of a heart attack on August 2, 1923, at the age of 57. His death was initially attributed to a cerebral hemorrhage, as doctors at the time did not generally understand the symptoms of a heart attack. The Harding Tomb in Marion Hardings death came as a great shock to the nation. The president was liked and admired, and the press and public had followed his illness closely, and been reassured by his apparent recovery. Harding was returned to his train in a casket for a journey across the nation followed closely in the newspapers. Nine million people lined the tracks as Hardings body was taken from San Francisco to Washington, D.C., and after services there, home to Marion, Ohio, for burial. In Marion, the body of Warren Harding was placed on a horsedrawn hearse, which was followed by President Coolidge and Chief Justice Taft, then by Hardings wife and father. They followed it through the city, past the Star building where the presses stood silent, and at last to the Marion Cemetery, where the casket was placed in the cemeterys receiving vault. Hardings body, along with that of his wife who died in 1924, rests today in the Harding Tomb, which was dedicated in 1931 by President Hoover. Scandals Harding appointed a number of friends and acquaintances to federal positions. Some served competently, such as Charles E. Sawyer, the Hardings personal physician from Marion who attended to them in the White House. Sawyer had alerted Harding to the Veterans Bureau scandal. Others proved ineffective in office, such as Daniel R. Crissinger, a Marion lawyer whom Harding made Comptroller of the Currency and later a governor of the Federal Reserve Board or Hardings old friend, Director of the Mint Frank Scobey, who Trani and Wilson noted did little damage during his tenure. Hardings brotherinlaw Heber H. Votaw, superintendent of federal prisons, was unable to root out the drug trade from within the facilities. Others of these associates proved corrupt and were later dubbed the Ohio Gang. Harding made his friend, Frank E. Scobey, Director of the Mint. Medal by Chief Engraver George T. Morgan. Most of the scandals that have marred the reputation of Hardings administration did not emerge until after his death. The Veterans Bureau scandal was known to Harding in January 1923 but, according to Trani and Wilson, the presidents handling of it did him little credit. Harding allowed the corrupt director of the bureau, Charles R. Forbes, to flee to Europe, though he later returned and served prison time. Harding had learned that Daughertys factotum at the Justice Department, Jess Smith, was involved in corruption. The president ordered Daugherty to get Smith out of Washington and removed his name from the upcoming presidential trip to Alaska. Smith committed suicide on May 30, 1923. It is uncertain how much Harding knew about Smiths illicit activities. Murray noted that Harding was not involved in the corruption and did not condone it. Hoover accompanied Harding on the Western trip and later wrote that Harding asked then what Hoover would do if he knew of some great scandal, whether to publicize it or bury it. Hoover replied that Harding should publish and get credit for integrity, and asked for details. Harding stated that it had to do with Smith but, when Hoover enquired as to Daughertys possible involvement, Harding refused to answer. Teapot Dome Albert B. Fall, Hardings first Secretary of the Interior and the first former cabinet member sent to prison for crimes committed in office The scandal which has likely done the greatest damage to Hardings reputation is Teapot Dome. Like most of the administrations scandals, it came to light after Hardings death, and he was not aware of the illegal aspects. Teapot Dome involved an oil reserve in Wyoming which was one of three set aside for the use of the Navy in a national emergency. There was a longstanding argument that the reserves should be developed Wilsons first Interior Secretary Franklin Knight Lane was an advocate of this position. When the Harding administration took office, Interior Secretary Fall took up Lanes argument and Harding signed an executive order in May 1921 transferring the reserves from the Navy Department to Interior. This was done with the consent of Navy Secretary Edwin C. Denby. The Interior Department announced in July 1921 that Edward Doheny had been awarded a lease to drill along the edges of naval reserve Elk Hills in California. The announcement attracted little controversy, as the oil would have been lost to wells on adjacent private land. Wyoming Senator John Kendrick had heard from constituents that Teapot Dome had also been leased, but no announcement had been made. The Interior Department refused to provide documentation, so he secured the passage of a Senate resolution compelling disclosure. The department sent a copy of the lease granting drilling rights to Harry Sinclairs Mammoth Oil Company, along with a statement that there had been no competitive bidding because military preparedness was involved Mammoth was to build oil tanks for the Navy as part of the deal. This satisfied some people, but some conservationists, such as Gifford Pinchot, Harry A. Slattery, and others, pushed for a full investigation into Fall and his activities. They got Wisconsin Senator Robert M. La Follette Sr. to begin a Senate investigation into the oil leases. La Follette persuaded Democratic Montana Senator Thomas J. Walsh to lead the investigation, and Walsh read through the truckload of material provided by the Interior Department through 1922 into 1923, including a letter from Harding stating that the transfer and leases had been with his knowledge and approval. Hearings into Teapot Dome began in October 1923, after Hardings death. Fall had left office earlier that year, but he denied receiving any money from Sinclair or Doheny Sinclair agreed. The following month, Walsh learned that Fall had spent lavishly on expanding and improving his New Mexico ranch. Fall reappeared and stated that the money had come as a loan from Hardings friend and The Washington Post publisher Edward B. McLean, but McLean denied it when he testified. Doheny told the committee that he had given Fall the money in cash as a personal loan out of regard for their past association, but Fall invoked the Fifth Amendment right against selfincrimination when he was compelled to appear again, rather than answer questions. Investigators found that Fall and a relative had received a total of about 400,000 from Doheny and Sinclair, and that the transfers were contemporaneous with the controversial leases. Fall was ultimately convicted in 1929 for accepting bribes and, in 1931, became the first U.S. cabinet member to be imprisoned for crimes committed while in office. Sinclair was convicted only of contempt of court for jury tampering. Doheny was brought to trial before a jury in April 1930 for giving the bribe Fall had been convicted of accepting, but he was acquitted. Justice Department Harry M. Daugherty was implicated in the scandals but was never convicted of any offense. Hardings appointment of Harry M. Daugherty as Attorney General received more criticism than any other. Daughertys Ohio lobbying and back room maneuvers were not considered to qualify him for his office. When the scandals broke in 1923 and 1924, Daughertys many enemies were delighted at the prospect of connecting him with the dishonesty, and assumed he had taken part in Teapot Dome, though Fall and Daugherty were not friends. In February 1924, the Senate voted to investigate the Justice Department, where Daugherty remained Attorney General. Democratic Montana Senator Burton K. Wheeler was on the investigating committee and assumed the role of prosecutor when hearings began on March 12, 1924. Jess Smith had engaged in influence peddling before his suicide, conspiring with two other Ohioans, Howard Mannington and Fred A. Caskey, to accept payoffs from alcohol bootleggers to secure either immunity from prosecution or the release of liquor from government warehouses. Mannington and Caskeys residence became infamous as the Little Green House on K Street. Some witnesses, such as Smiths divorced wife Roxy Stinson, and corrupt former FBI agent Gaston Means, alleged that Daugherty was personally involved. Coolidge requested Daughertys resignation when the Attorney General indicated that he would not allow Wheelers committee access to Justice Department records, and Daugherty complied on March 28, 1924. The illicit activity that caused Daugherty the most problems was a Smith deal with Colonel Thomas W. Miller, a former Delaware congressman, whom Harding had appointed Alien Property Custodian. Smith and Miller received a payoff of almost half a million dollars for getting a Germanowned firm, the American Metal Company, released to new U.S. owners. Smith deposited 50,000 in a joint account with Daugherty, used for political purposes. Records relating to that account were destroyed by Daugherty and his brother. Miller and Daugherty were indicted for defrauding the government. The first trial, in September 1926, resulted in a hung jury at the second, early in 1927, Miller was convicted and served prison time, but the jury again hung as to Daugherty. Though charges against Daugherty were then dropped, and he was never convicted of any offense, his refusal to take the stand in his own defense devastated what was left of his reputation. The former Attorney General remained defiant, blaming his troubles on his enemies in the labor movement and on the Communists, and wrote that he had done nothing that prevents my looking the whole world in the face. Veterans Bureau Charles R. Forbes, director of the Veterans Bureau, who was sent to prison for defrauding the government Charles R. Forbes, the energetic director of the Veterans Bureau, sought to consolidate control of veterans hospitals and their construction in his bureau. At the start of Hardings presidency, this power was vested in the Treasury Department. The politicallypowerful American Legion backed Forbes and denigrated those who opposed him, like Secretary Mellon, and in April 1922, Harding agreed to transfer control to the Veterans Bureau. Forbes main task was to ensure that new hospitals were built around the country to help the 300,000 wounded World War I veterans. Near the beginning of 1922, Forbes had met Elias Mortimer, agent for the ThompsonBlack Construction Company of St. Louis, which wanted to construct the hospitals. The two men became close, and Mortimer paid for Forbes travels through the West, looking at potential hospital sites for the wounded World War I veterans. Forbes was also friendly with Charles F. Hurley, owner of the HurleyMason Construction Company of Washington state. Harding had ordered that all contracts be pursuant to public notice, but the three worked out a deal whereby the two companies would get the contracts with the profits divided three ways. Some of the money went to the bureaus chief counsel, Charles F. Cramer. Forbes defrauded the government in this hospital construction, increasing construction costs from 3,000 to 4,000 per bed. A tenth of the inflated construction billings was set aside for the conspirators, with Forbes receiving a third of the take. The graft then spread to land acquisition, with Forbes authorizing the purchase of a San Francisco tract that was worth less than 20,000 for 105,000. At least 25,000 of the resulting financial excess was divided between Forbes and Cramer. Intent on making more money, Forbes in November 1922 began selling valuable hospital supplies under his control in large warehouses at the Perryville Depot in Maryland. The government had stockpiled huge quantities of hospital supplies during the first World War, which Forbes unloaded for a fraction of their cost to the Boston firm of Thompson and Kelly at a time when the Veterans Bureau was buying supplies for the hospitals at a much higher price. The check on Forbes authority at Perryville was Dr. Sawyer, Hardings physician and chairman of the Federal Hospitalization Board. Sawyer told Harding that Forbes was selling valuable hospital supplies to an insider contractor. At first Harding did not believe it, but Sawyer secured proof in January 1923. A shocked Harding, who alternated between rage and despondency over the corruption in his administration, summoned Forbes to the White House and demanded his resignation. Harding did not want an open scandal and allowed Forbes to flee to Europe, from where he resigned on February 15, 1923. In spite of Hardings efforts, gossip about Forbes activities resulted in the Senate ordering an investigation two weeks later, and in midMarch, Cramer committed suicide. Mortimer was willing to tell all, as Forbes had had an affair with his wife . The construction executive was the star witness at the hearings in late 1923, after Hardings death. Forbes returned from Europe to testify, but convinced few, and in 1924, he and John W. Thompson, of Thompson Black, were tried in Chicago for conspiracy to defraud the government. Both were convicted and sentenced to two years in prison. Forbes began to serve his sentence in 1926 Thompson, who had a bad heart, died that year before commencing his. According to Trani and Wilson, One of the most troublesome aspects of the Harding presidency was that he appeared to be far more concerned with political liabilities of a scandal than in securing justice. Extramarital affairs Harding had an extramarital affair with Carrie Fulton Phillips of Marion, which lasted about fifteen years before ending in 1920. Letters from Harding to Phillips were discovered by Harding biographer Francis Russell in the possession of Marion attorney Donald Williamson while Russell was researching his book in 1963. Before that, the affair was not generally known. Williamson donated the letters to the Ohio Historical Society. Some there wanted the letters destroyed to preserve what remained of Hardings reputation. A lawsuit ensued, with Hardings heirs claiming copyright over the letters. The case was ultimately settled in 1971, with the letters donated to the Library of Congress. They were sealed until 2014, but before their opening, historians used copies at Case Western Reserve University and in Russells papers at the University of Wyoming. Russell concluded from the letters that Phillips was the love of Hardings life the enticements of his mind and body combined in one person, but historian Justin P. Coffey in his 2014 review of Harding biographies criticizes him for obsessing over Hardings sex life. The allegations of Hardings other known mistress, Nan Britton, long remained uncertain. In 1927, Britton, also a Marionite, published The Presidents Daughter , alleging that her child Elizabeth Ann Blaesing had been fathered by Harding. The book, which was dedicated to all unwedded mothers and their innocent children whose fathers are usually not known to the world, was sold, like pornography, doortodoor wrapped in brown paper. The late presidents reputation had deteriorated since his death in 1923, and many believed Britton. The public was tantalized by salacious details such as Brittons claim that the two had sex in a White House closet, with Secret Service agents posted to ward off intruders. Although part of the public believed her, a jury found against her when she alleged she was libeled by a refutation of her book. According to Harding family lore, the late president was infertile and could not have fathered a child, having suffered from mumps in childhood Britton maintained that Harding had provided child support of 500 per month for the daughter he never met, but she had destroyed romantic correspondence from him at his request. Hardings biographers, writing while Brittons allegations remained uncertain, differed on their truth Russell believed them unquestioningly while Dean, having reviewed Brittons papers at UCLA, regarded them as unproven. In 2015, DNA comparisons between members of the Harding and Blaesing families conducted by ancestry.com indicated that Harding was Elizabeths father. Sinclair wondered why Hardings infidelity was held so much against him, given that Grover Cleveland was elected president in 1884 although it was known he had a mistress and may have fathered a son out of wedlock. Historical view Harding memorial issue, issued September1, 1923 Upon his death, Harding was deeply mourned. He was called a man of peace in many European newspapers American journalists praised him lavishly, with some describing him as having given his life for his country. His associates were stunned by his demise Daugherty wrote, I can hardly write about it or allow myself to think about it yet. Hughes stated, I cannot realize that our beloved Chief is no longer with us. Hagiographic accounts of Hardings life quickly followed his death, such as Joe Mitchell Chapples Life and Times of Warren G. Harding, Our AfterWar President . By then, the scandals were breaking, and the Harding administration soon became a byword for corruption in the view of the public. Works written in the late 1920s helped shape Hardings historical reputation Masks in a Pageant by William Allen White mocked and dismissed Harding, as did Samuel Hopkins Adams fictionalized account of the Harding administration, Revelry . These books depicted Hardings time in office as one of great presidential weakness. The publication of Nan Brittons bestselling book disclosing they had had an affair also lowered the late president in public esteem. President Coolidge, not wishing to be further associated with his predecessor, refused to dedicate the Harding Tomb. Hoover, Coolidges successor, was similarly reluctant, but with Coolidge in attendance presided over the dedication in 1931. By that time, with the Great Depression in full swing, Hoover was nearly as discredited as Harding. Adams continued to shape the negative view of Harding with several nonfiction works in the 1930s, culminating with The Incredible Era The Life and Times of Warren G. Harding in which he called his subject an amiable, wellmeaning thirdrate Mr. Babbitt, with the equipment of a smalltown semieducated journalist... It could not work. It did not work. Dean deems the works of White and Adams remarkably unbalanced and unfair accounts, exaggerating the negative, assigning responsibility to Harding for all wrongs, and denying him credit for anything done right. Today there is considerable evidence refuting their portrayals of Harding. Yet the myth has persisted. President Harding and First Lady Florence Harding. Photo c. 1922. Mrs. Harding was highly protective of her husbands personal legacy. The opening of Hardings papers for research in 1964 sparked a small spate of biographies, of which the most controversial was Russells The Shadow of Blooming Grove , which concluded that the rumors of black ancestry deeply affected Harding in his formative years, causing both Hardings conservatism and his desire to get along with everyone. Coffey faults Russells methods, and deems the biography largely critical, though not entirely unsympathetic. Murrays The Harding Era took a more positive view of the president, and put him in the context of his times. Trani and Wilson faulted Murray for a tendency to go overboard in trying to connect Harding with the successful policies of cabinet officers, and for asserting, without sufficient evidence, that a new, more assertive Harding had emerged by 1923. More recently, there have been revisionist books on Harding. Robert Ferrells The Strange Deaths of President Harding , according to Coffey, spends almost the entire work challenging every story about Harding and concludes that almost everything that is read and taught about his subject is wrong. In 2004, John Dean, noted for his involvement in another presidential scandal, Watergate, wrote the Harding volume in The American Presidents series of short biographies, edited by Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. Coffey deemed that book the most revisionist to date, and faults Dean for glossing over some unfavorable episodes in Hardings life, like his silence during the 1914 Senate campaign, when his opponent Hogan was being attacked for his faith. Harding has traditionally been ranked as one of the worst presidents. In a 1948 poll conducted by Harvard University, historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, Sr. conducted the first notable survey of scholars opinions of the presidents, Harding ranked last among the 29 presidents considered. He has also been last in other polls since, which Ferrell attributes to scholars reading little but sensational accounts of Harding. Murray argued that Harding deserves more credit than historians have given He was certainly the equal of a Franklin Pierce, an Andrew Johnson, a Benjamin Harrison, or even a Calvin Coolidge. In concrete accomplishments, his administration was superior to a sizable portion of those in the nations history. Coffey believes the academic lack of interest in Harding has cost him his reputation, as scholars still rank Harding as nearly dead last among presidents. Murray argued that Harding sowed the seeds for his administrations poor standing See also Cultural depictions of Warren G. Harding Laddie Boy, Hardings dog List of people on the cover of Time Magazine 1920s March 10, 1923 List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience List of United States Presidents who died in office Memorials to Warren G. Harding US Presidents on US postage stamps Notes References Bibliography External links White House biography Full audio and text of a number of Harding speeches, Miller Center of Public Affairs President Harding and Calvin Coolidge , a film from 1920 Warren Harding A Resource Guide, Library of Congress Extensive essays on Warren Harding and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Life Portrait of Warren G. Harding, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , September 20, 1999 Warren G. Harding Personal Manuscripts Category1865 births Category1923 deaths Category19thcentury Baptists Category20thcentury Baptists Category20thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican people of Dutch descent CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of Scottish descent CategoryAmerican people of Welsh descent CategoryBaptists from the United States CategoryLieutenant Governors of Ohio CategoryOhio Central College alumni CategoryOhio Republicans CategoryOhio State Senators CategoryPeople from Marion, Ohio CategoryPeople from Morrow County, Ohio CategoryPresidency of Warren G. Harding CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryPresidents of the United States who died while in office CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party United States Senators CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1916 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1920 CategoryUnited States Senators fromOhio
William Henry Harrison Sr. was an American military officer, a principal contributor in the War of 1812, and the ninth President of the United States . He was the last president born as a British subject, and died of pneumonia just days into his term, thereby serving the shortest tenure in United States presidential history. He was the first president to die in office, and his death sparked a brief constitutional issue. Its resolution left unsettled Constitutional questions as to the presidential line of succession until the passage of the Twentyfifth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1967. Harrison was the son of Founding Father Benjamin Harrison V and in turn was the grandfather of Benjamin Harrison, the 23rd United States President . Before election as president, Harrison served as the first congressional delegate from the Northwest Territory and the first Governor of Indiana Territory. He gained national fame for leading U.S. forces against Native Americans at the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811, where he earned the nickname Old Tippecanoe. He was promoted to Major General in the subsequent War of 1812 his most notable action was in the Battle of the Thames in 1813. This battle resulted in the death of Tecumseh and the dissolution of the Indian coalition which Tecumseh had led.Langguth, A. J. . Union 1812The Americans Who Fought the Second War of Independence , New York Simon Schuster. . p. 206 After the war, Harrison moved to Ohio, where he was elected to the United States House of Representatives. In 1824, the state legislature elected him to the United States Senate. He served a truncated term after being appointed as Minister Plenipotentiary to Gran Colombia in May 1828. In Santa Fe de Bogot, he spoke with president Simn Bolvar, urging Bolvar to guide his nation toward Americanstyle democracy. Harrison returned to private life on his farm in Ohio until he was nominated for the presidency as one of several Whig Party candidates in the election of 1836. He received more votes than any other Whig, but was defeated by Democrat Martin Van Buren, and returned again to his farm. Van Buren soon became a major target of criticism from the Whigs following the Panic of 1837. Seeking to run a noncontroversial and less ideological war hero who could defeat Van Buren based on popularity, a unified Whig Party nominated Harrison over party founder Henry Clay and fellow general Winfield Scott. John Tyler of Virginia was selected as his running mate, and Harrison and Tyler defeated Van Buren in the 1840 election. At the time, he was the oldest president ever elected. However, Harrison died of pneumonia in April 1841, a month after taking office. Tyler then assumed the presidency, setting a major precedent. Early life Coat of Arms of William Henry Harrison Early life and education William Henry Harrison, the seventh and youngest child of Benjamin Harrison V and Elizabeth Bassett Harrison, was born on February 9, 1773, at Berkeley Plantation, the Harrison family home in Charles City County, Virginia. He was a member of a prominent political family of entirely English descent, whose ancestors had been in Virginia since the 1630s. Harrison was also the last U.S. president born as a British subject before the American Revolution. Williams father was a Virginia planter who served as a delegate to the Continental Congress and who signed the Declaration of Independence. The senior Harrison also served in the Virginia legislature, and as the fifth governor of Virginia in the years during and after the American Revolutionary War. Williams older brother, Carter Bassett Harrison, represented Virginia in the U.S. House . Harrison was tutored at home until age 14 when he entered Hampden Sydney College, a Presbyterian college in Virginia. He remained there for three years, receiving a classical education that included Latin, Greek, French, logic, and debate. Harrisons Episcopalian father removed him from the college, possibly for religious reasons, and he then briefly attended a boys academy in Southampton County, before his father had him transfer to Philadelphia for medical training in 1790. He boarded with Robert Morris and entered the University of Pennsylvania, where he studied medicine under Doctor Benjamin Rush. Harrison later told his biographer that he did not enjoy the subject. In the spring of 1791, shortly after he began his medical studies, his father died. When the eighteenyearold Harrison, who was left in the guardianship of Morris, discovered that his familys financial situation left him without funds for further schooling, he abandoned medical school in favor of a military career. Early military career Governor Henry Lee III of Virginia, a friend of Harrisons father, learned of Williams situation and persuaded him to join the military. Within twentyfour hours of meeting Lee, eighteenyearold Harrison was commissioned as an ensign in the U.S. Army, 1st Infantry Regiment. He was initially assigned to Fort Washington, the presentday site of Cincinnati, in the Northwest Territory, where the army was engaged in the ongoing Northwest Indian War. Harrison was promoted to lieutenant after Major General Mad Anthony Wayne took command of the western army in 1792 following a disastrous defeat under Arthur St. Clair, its previous commander. In 1793 he became Waynes aidedecamp and learned how to successfully command an army on the American frontier he participated in Waynes decisive victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers on August 20, 1794, which brought the Northwest Indian War to a successful close. Harrison was a signatory of the Treaty of Greenville as witness to Wayne, the principal negotiator for the U.S.. Under the terms of the treaty, a coalition of Native Americans ceded a portion of their lands to the federal government that opened twothirds of presentday Ohio to settlement by European Americans. Following his mothers death in 1793, Harrison inherited a portion of his familys Virginia estate, including approximately of land and several slaves. Harrison, who was serving in the army at the time, sold his land to his brother. Marriage and family In 1795, at age 22, Harrison met Anna Tuthill Symmes of North Bend, Ohio. She was a daughter of Anna Tuthill and Judge John Cleves Symmes, who served as a colonel in the American Revolutionary War, as a representative to the Congress of the Confederation, and became a prominent figure in Ohio. Harrison asked the judge for permission to marry Anna but was refused the pair waited until Symmes left on business, eloped and were married on November 25, 1795, at the North Bend home of Doctor Stephen Wood, treasurer of the Northwest Territory. The couple honeymooned at Fort Washington since Harrison was still on military duty. Two weeks later, at a farewell dinner for General Wayne, Judge Symmes confronted his new soninlaw for the first time since the wedding, sternly demanding to know how Harrison intended to support a family. Harrison responded, by my sword, and my own right arm, sir.Bob Dole, Great Presidential Wit, 2001, p. 222 Afterward, still concerned about Harrisons ability to provide for Anna, Judge Symmes sold the young couple of land in North Bend. Symmes did not come to accept Harrison until he had achieved fame on the battlefield. William and Anna Harrison had ten children Elizabeth Bassett , John Cleves Symmes , Lucy Singleton , William Henry , John Scott father of future U.S. President Benjamin Harrison, Benjamin , Mary Symmes , Carter Bassett , Anna Tuthill , James Findlay . Anna, who was frequently in poor health during the marriage, primarily due to her many pregnancies, outlived William by twentythree years. She died on February 25, 1864, at age eightyeight. In a biography of Walter Francis White AfricanAmerican civil rights leader and N.A.A.C.P president historian Kenneth Robert Janken notes that Whites mother Madeline Harrison traced some of her mixedrace white ancestry to Harrison in Virginia. According to Janken, her family maintained that Dilsia, a female slave belonging to William Henry Harrison, had six children by him, born into slavery. Four were said to be sold to a planter in La Grange, Georgia, including a daughter, Marie Harrison. Marie was said to be Madelines mother. Political career Harrison began his political career when he resigned from the military effective June 1, 1798. and campaigned among his friends and family for a post in the Northwest Territorial government. With the aid of his close friend Timothy Pickering, who was serving as U.S. Secretary of State, Harrison received a recommendation to replace Withrop Sargent, the outgoing territorial secretary. President John Adams appointed Harrison to the position in July 1798. Harrison frequently served as acting territorial governor during the absences of Governor Arthur St. Clair. U.S. Congress Harrison had many friends in the eastern aristocracy, and quickly gained a reputation among them as a frontier leader. He ran a successful horsebreeding enterprise that won him acclaim throughout the Northwest Territory. Harrison became a champion of lower land prices, a primary concern of settlers in the Territory at the time. The U.S. Congress had legislated a territorial land policy that led to high land costs, which many of the territorys residents disliked. In October 1799, after it had been determined that the Northwest Territorys population had reached a sufficient number to have a delegate in the U.S. Congress, Harrison ran for election. He campaigned to encourage further migration to the territory, which eventually led to statehood. Engraved portrait print of William Henry Harrison at age 27 as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from the Northwest Territory At Large, by Charles Balthazar Julien Fevret de SaintMmin, 17701852. Note the misspelling of the name. In 1798, at age twentysix, Harrison defeated Arthur St. Clair Jr., the son of the territorial governor, by one vote to become the Northwest Territorys first congressional delegate, and served in the Sixth United States Congress from March 4, 1799, to May 14, 1800. As the Northwest Territorys delegate to Congress, he had no authority to vote on legislative bills, but he was permitted to serve on a committee, submit legislation, and engage in debate. Harrison became chairman of the Committee on Public Lands and successfully promoted passage of the Land Act of 1800, which made it easier to buy land in the Northwest Territory in smaller tracts at a low cost. The sale price for public lands was set at 2 per acre. This became an important contributor to rapid population growth of the Northwest Territory. Harrison also served on the committee that decided how to divide the Northwest Territory into smaller sections. The committee recommended splitting the territory into two segments. The eastern section, which continued to be known as the Northwest Territory, comprised the presentday state of Ohio and eastern Michigan the western section was named the Indiana Territory and consisted of the presentday states of Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, a portion of western Michigan, and the eastern portion of Minnesota. The two new territories were formally established in 1800 following the passage of . On May 13, 1800, President John Adams appointed Harrison as the governor of the newly established Indiana Territory, based on his ties to the west and seemingly neutral political stances. Harrison, caught unaware, was reluctant to accept the position until he received assurances from the Jeffersonians that he would not be removed from office after they gained power in the upcoming elections. After Harrisons governorship was confirmed by the U.S. Senate, he resigned from Congress to become the first Indiana territorial governor in 1801. Indiana territorial governor Harrison arrived at Vincennes, the capital of the newly established Indiana Territory on January 10, 1801, to begin his duties. U.S. presidents Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, both of whom were members of the DemocraticRepublican Party, reappointed Harrison as the Indiana territorial governor in 1803, 1806, and 1809 Harrison was among the few Federalist appointees to so retain his post. On December 28, 1812, Harrison resigned his position as territorial governor to continue his military career during the War of 1812. In 1804, while serving as the Indiana territorial governor, Harrison was assigned additional duties to administer the civilian government of the District of Louisiana, a part of the Louisiana Territory that included land north of the 33rd parallel. In October 1804, when a civilian government went into effect, Harrison served as the Louisiana districts executive leader. Harrison administered the districts affairs for five weeks, until the Louisiana Territory was formally established, effective July 4, 1805, and Brigadier General James Wilkinson assumed the duties of the Louisiana territorial governor. In 1805 Harrison built a plantationstyle home near Vincennes that he named Grouseland, alluding to the birds on the property the thirteenroom home was one of the first brick structures in the territory. During his term as territorial governor, Harrisons home served as a center of social and political life in the territory. The farm has been restored and is a popular, modernday tourist attraction. After the territorial capital was moved to Corydon in 1813, Harrison built a second home at nearby Harrison Valley. In addition to his duties as territorial governor, Harrison founded Jefferson University at Vincennes in 1801. The school was incorporated as Vincennes University on November 29, 1806, and is one of two U.S. colleges founded by a U.S. President the other is the University of Virginia, founded by Thomas Jefferson. Governor Harrison had wideranging powers in the new territory, including authority to appoint territorial officials and the legislature, as well as authority to divide the territory into smaller political districts and counties. One of his primary responsibilities was to obtain title to Indian lands that would allow future settlement and increase the territorys population, a requirement for statehood. Harrison was eager to expand the territory for personal reasons as well his political fortunes were tied to Indianas eventual statehood. On February 8, 1803, when President Jefferson reappointed Harrison as the Indiana territorial governor, he also granted Harrison the authority to negotiate and conclude treaties with the Indians. Between 1803 and 1809, Harrison supervised eleven treaties with Indian leaders that provided the federal government with large tracts of land that included the southern third of presentday Indiana and most of presentday Illinois for further settlement. The Treaty of St. Louis with Quashquame required the Sauk and Meskwaki tribes to cede much of western Illinois and parts of Missouri to the federal government. Many of the Sauk, especially Black Hawk, greatly resented this treaty and the loss of lands, a primary reason the Sauk sided with the United Kingdom during the War of 1812. Harrison thought the Treaty of Grouseland appeased some of the Indians, but tensions remained high along the frontier. The Treaty of Fort Wayne raised new tensions when Harrison purchased land from the Miami tribe, who claimed ownership of the land, more than 2.5 million acres of land inhabited by the Shawnee, Kickapoo, Wea, and Piankeshaw peoples. Harrison rushed the treaty process by offering large subsidies to the tribes and their leaders so that the treaty would be in force before President Jefferson left office and the administration changed. Although Harrisons proslavery position made him unpopular with the Indiana Territorys antislavery supporters, he used his political power to make several attempts to introduce slavery into the territory. His efforts were ultimately unsuccessful due to the territorys growing antislavery movement. In 1803, Harrison lobbied Congress to vote in favor of a petition to suspend Article VI of the Northwest Ordinance for ten years, a move that would allow slavery in the Indiana Territory. At the end of the suspension period citizens in the territories covered under the ordinance could decide for themselves whether to permit slavery. Harrison claimed the suspension was necessary to encourage settlement and would make the territory economically viable, but Congress rejected the idea. In 1803 and 1805 Harrison and the appointed territorial judges enacted territorial laws that evaded the provisions outlined in Article VI of the Ordinance, authorized indentures, allowed slaves to be brought into the territory, and gave their masters authority to determine the length of indentured servitude. The proslavery laws caused a significant stir in the territory. In 1809, after the separation of the western portion of the Indiana Territory to create the Illinois Territory, elections were held to select members of territorial legislatures upper and lower houses for the first time. Harrison found himself at odds with the legislature after the antislavery faction came to power and the eastern portion of the Indiana Territory grew to include a large, antislavery population. When the Indiana Territorys general assembly convened in 1810, its antislavery faction immediately repealed the indenturing laws enacted in 1803 and in 1805. After 1809 Harrisons political authority declined as the Indiana territorial legislature assumed more authority and the territory advanced toward statehood. By 1812 Harrison had moved away and resumed his military career. President Jefferson, the primary author of the Northwest Ordinance, had made a secret compact with James Lemen to defeat the proslavery movement led by Harrison. Although he was a slaveholder, Jefferson did not want slavery to expand into the Northwest Territory, as he believed the institution should eventually end. Under the JeffersonLemen compact, Jefferson donated money to Lemen to found churches in Illinois and Indiana to stop the proslavery movement. In Indiana, the founding of an antislavery church led to citizens signing a petition and organizing politically to defeat Harrisons efforts to legalize slavery in the territory. Jefferson and Lemen were both instrumental in defeating Harrisons attempts in 1805 and 1807 to secure approval to expand slavery in the territory. Army general Tecumseh and Tippecanoe An Indian resistance movement against U.S. expansion had been growing through the leadership of the Shawnee brothers, Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa . The conflict became known as Tecumsehs War. Tenskwatawa convinced the native tribes that they would be protected by the Great Spirit and no harm could befall them if they would rise up against the white settlers. He encouraged resistance by telling the tribes to pay white traders only half of what they owed and to give up all the white mans ways, including their clothing, muskets, and especially whiskey, which was becoming known as evil for American Indians. 1915 version of a depiction of Tecumseh believed to have been sketched In August 1810, Tecumseh led 400 armed warriors down the Wabash River to meet with Harrison in Vincennes. As the warriors were dressed in war paint, their sudden appearance at first frightened the soldiers at Vincennes. The leaders of the group were escorted to Grouseland, where they met Harrison. Tecumseh insisted that the Fort Wayne Treaty was illegitimate. He argued that no one tribe could sell land without the approval of the other tribes he asked Harrison to nullify it and warned that Americans should not attempt to settle the lands sold in the treaty. Tecumseh informed Harrison that he had threatened to kill the chiefs who signed the treaty if they carried out its terms, and that his confederation of tribes was growing rapidly. Harrison said the Miami were the owners of the land and could sell it if they so chose. He rejected Tecumsehs claim that all the Indians formed one nation. He said each tribe could have separate relations with the United States if they chose to. Harrison argued that the Great Spirit would have made all the tribes speak one language if they were to be one nation. Tecumseh launched an impassioned rebuttal, but Harrison was unable to understand his language. A Shawnee friendly to Harrison cocked his pistol from the sidelines to alert Harrison that Tecumsehs speech was leading to trouble. Some witnesses reported that Tecumseh was encouraging the warriors to kill Harrison. Many of the warriors began to pull their weapons, representing a substantial threat to Harrison and the town, which held a population of only 1,000. Harrison pulled his sword. Tecumsehs warriors backed down after the officers had pulled their firearms in defense of Harrison. Chief Winnemac, who was friendly to Harrison, countered Tecumsehs arguments and told the warriors that since they had come in peace, they should return home in peace. Before leaving, Tecumseh informed Harrison that unless the treaty were nullified, he would seek an alliance with the British. After the meeting, Tecumseh journeyed to meet with many of the tribes in the region, hoping to create a confederation to battle the United States. In 1811, while Tecumseh was traveling, Harrison was authorized by Secretary of War William Eustis to march against the nascent confederation as a show of force. Harrison led an army of more than 1,000 men north, to intimidate the Shawnee into making peace. Instead, the tribes launched a surprise attack on Harrisons army early on November 7, in what became known as the Battle of Tippecanoe. Harrison defeated the tribal forces at Prophetstown, next to the Wabash and Tippecanoe Rivers. Harrison was hailed as a national hero and the battle became famous. However, his troops had greatly outnumbered the attackers, and suffered many more casualties during the battle. When reporting to Secretary Eustis, Harrison informed him the battle occurred near the Tippecanoe River , and he feared an imminent reprisal attack. The first dispatch did not make clear which side had won the conflict, and the secretary at first interpreted it as a defeat. The followup dispatch made the U.S. victory clear. When no second attack came, the defeat of the Shawnee was more certain. Eustis demanded to know why Harrison had not taken adequate precautions in fortifying his camp against attacks. Harrison countered by saying he had considered the position strong enough. The dispute was the catalyst of a disagreement between Harrison and the Department of War that continued into the War of 1812. The press did not cover the battle at first, and one Ohio paper misinterpreted Harrisons dispatch to Eustis to mean he was defeated. By December, as most major American papers carried stories on the battle, public outrage over the Shawnee attack grew. At a time of high tensions with the United Kingdom, many Americans blamed the British for inciting the tribes to violence and supplying them with firearms. In response, Congress passed resolutions condemning the British for interfering in American domestic affairs. A few months later, on June 18, 1812, the U.S. government declared war against United Kingdom. Shortly thereafter, Harrison left Vincennes to seek a military appointment. War of 1812 This portrait of Harrison originally showed him in civilian clothes as the congressional delegate from the Northwest Territory in 1800, but the uniform was added after he became famous in the War of 1812. The outbreak of war with the British in 1812 led to continued conflict with Indians in the Northwest. Harrison briefly served as a major general in the Kentucky militia until the U.S. government commissioned him to command the Army of the Northwest on September 17, 1812. Although Harrison received federal military pay for his service, he also collected a territorial governors salary from September until December 28, 1812, when he formally resigned as governor and continued his military service. After the American defeat in the Siege of Detroit, General James Winchester, who became the commander of the Army of the Northwest, offered Harrison the rank of brigadier general. Harrison also wanted sole command of the army. In September 1812, after President James Madison removed Winchester from command, Harrison became commander of the fresh recruits. Initially, the British and their Indian allies greatly outnumbered Harrisons troops. During the winter of 1812 13 Harrison constructed a defensive position along the Maumee River in northwest Ohio and named it Fort Meigs in honor of the Ohio governor Return J. Meigs Jr.. After receiving reinforcements in 1813, Harrison took the offensive and led the army north to battle the Shawnee and their British allies. Harrison won victories in the Indiana Territory and in Ohio and recaptured Detroit, before invading Upper Canada . Harrisons army defeated the British on October 5, 1813, at the Battle of the Thames, in which Tecumseh was killed. This pivotal battle is considered to be one of the great American victories in the war, second only to the Battle of New Orleans. In 1814 U.S. Secretary of War John Armstrong divided the command of the army, assigning Harrison to a backwater post and giving control of the front to one of Harrisons subordinates. In May, following Harrisons reassignment, he resigned from the army his resignation was accepted later that summer. After the war ended, Congress investigated Harrisons resignation and determined that Armstrong had mistreated him during his military campaign and that his resignation was justified. Congress awarded Harrison a gold medal for his services during the War of 1812. Following the defeat of the British and their Indian allies in western Canada, Harrison and Lewis Cass, governor of the Michigan Territory, were delegated the responsibility for negotiating a peace treaty with the Indians, known as the Treaty of Greenville . In June 1815, at President Madisons request, the U.S. government appointed Harrison to serve as one of the commissioners responsible for negotiating a second postwar treaty with the Indians that became known as the Treaty of Spring Wells . Both treaties were advantageous to the United States. In the Spring Wells treaty the tribes ceded a large tract of land in the west, providing additional land for American purchase and settlement. Postwar life Public office After John Gibson replaced Harrison as Indiana territorial governor in 1812 and Harrisons resignation from the army in 1814, he returned to his family in North Bend. Harrison cultivated his land and enlarged the log cabin farmhouse, but he soon returned to public life. In 1816 Harrison was elected to complete the term of John McLean of Ohio in the U.S. House of Representatives, where Harrison represented the state from October 8, 1816, to March 3, 1819. In 1817 Harrison declined to serve as Secretary of War under President Monroe. In 1819 he was elected to the Ohio State Senate and served until 1821, having lost the election for Ohio governor in 1820. In 1822 he ran for a seat in the U.S. House, but lost by 500 votes to James W. Gazlay. In 1824 Harrison was elected to the U.S. Senate, where he served until May 20, 1828. Fellow westerners in Congress called Harrison a Buckeye, a term of affection related to the native Ohio buckeye tree. He was an Ohio presidential elector in 1820 for James Monroe and for Henry Clay in 1824. Appointed in 1828 as minister plenipotentiary to Gran Colombia, Harrison resigned from Congress and served in his new post until March 8, 1829. He arrived in Bogot on December 22, 1828 and found the condition of Colombia saddening. Harrison reported to the Secretary of State that the country was on the edge of anarchy, including his opinion that Simn Bolvar was about to become a military dictator. While minister in Colombia, Harrison wrote a rebuke to Bolvar, stating the strongest of all governments is that which is most free. He called on Bolvar to encourage the development of a democracy. In response, Bolvar wrote, The United States... seem destined by Providence to plague America with torments in the name of freedom, a sentiment that achieved fame in Latin America. When the new administration of President Andrew Jackson took office in March 1829, Harrison was recalled so the new president could make his own appointment to the position he returned to the United States in June. Private citizen After Harrison returned to the United States from Colombia, he settled on his farm in North Bend, Ohio, his adopted home state, living in relative retirement after nearly four decades of government service. Having accumulated no substantial wealth during his lifetime, he subsisted on his savings, a small pension, and the income produced by his farm. Harrison cultivated corn and established a distillery to produce whiskey. After a brief time in the liquor business, he became disturbed by the effects of alcohol on its consumers, and closed the distillery. In a later address to the Hamilton County Agricultural Board in 1831, Harrison said he had sinned in making whiskey, and hoped that others would learn from his mistake and stop the production of liquors. In these early years, Harrison also earned money from his contributions to a biography written by James Hall, entitled A Memoir of the Public Services of William Henry Harrison , published in 1836. That year, he made an unsuccessful run for the presidency as a Whig candidate. Between 1836 and 1840, Harrison served as Clerk of Courts for Hamilton County. This was his job when he was elected president in 1840. About this time, Harrison met AfricanAmerican abolitionist and Underground Railroad conductor George DeBaptiste who lived in nearby Madison. The two became friends, and DeBaptiste became his personal servant, staying with Harrison until his death.Tobin, Jacqueline L. From Midnight to Dawn The Last Tracks of the Underground Railroad . Anchor, 2008. pp. 200209 By 1840, when Harrison campaigned for president a second time, over a dozen books had been published on his life. He was hailed by many as a national hero. 1836 presidential campaign Chromolithograph campaign poster for William Henry Harrison Harrison was the Northern Whig candidate for president in 1836, one of only two times in American history when a major political party intentionally ran more than one presidential candidate . Vice President Martin Van Buren, the Democratic candidate, was popular and deemed likely to win the election against an individual Whig candidate. The Whig plan was to elect popular Whigs regionally, deny Van Buren the 148 electoral votes needed for election, and force the House of Representatives to decide the election. They hoped the Whigs would control the House after the general elections. Harrison ran in all the free states except Massachusetts, and the slave states of Delaware, Maryland, and Kentucky. Hugh L. White ran in the remaining slave states except for South Carolina. Daniel Webster ran in Massachusetts, and Willie P. Mangum in South Carolina. The plan narrowly failed, as Van Buren won the election with 170 electoral votes. A swing of just over 4,000 votes in Pennsylvania would have given that states 30 electoral votes to Harrison, and the election would have been decided in the House of Representatives. 1840 presidential campaign Poster of Harrisons accomplishments Harrison was the Whig candidate and faced the incumbent Van Buren in the 1840 election. He was chosen over more controversial members of the party, such as Clay and Webster, and based his campaign on his military record and on the weak U.S. economy, caused by the Panic of 1837. In a ploy to blame Van Buren for the depressed economy, the Whigs nicknamed the latter Van Ruin. The Democrats ridiculed Harrison by calling him Granny Harrison, the petticoat general, because he resigned from the army before the War of 1812 ended. When asking voters whether Harrison should be elected, the Democrats asked what Harrisons name spelled backwards would be No Sirrah. They also cast Harrison as a provincial, outoftouch, old man who would rather sit in his log cabin drinking hard cider than attend to the administration of the country. This strategy backfired when Harrison and John Tyler, his vice presidential running mate, adopted the log cabin and hard cider as campaign symbols. Their campaign used the symbols on banners and posters, and created bottles of hard cider shaped like log cabins, all to connect the candidates to the common man. 1840 Electoral Vote Map Although Harrison had come from a wealthy, slaveholding Virginia family, his campaign promoted him as a humble frontiersman in the style popularized by Andrew Jackson. In contrast, the Whigs presented Van Buren as a wealthy elitist. A memorable example was the Gold Spoon Oration that Pennsylvanias Whig representative, Charles Ogle, delivered in the U.S. House. The speech ridiculed Van Burens elegant, White House lifestyle and lavish spending. A Whig chant in which people would spit tobacco juice as they chanted wirtwirt, also exhibited the difference between candidates from the time of the election The Whigs boasted of Harrisons military record and his reputation as the hero of the Battle of Tippecanoe. The campaign slogan, Tippecanoe and Tyler, Too, became one of the most famous in American politics. Harrison won a landslide victory in the Electoral College, 234 electoral votes to Van Burens 60, although the popular vote was much closer. Harrison received 53 percent of the popular vote to Van Burens 47 percent, with a margin of less than 150,000 votes. Presidency Shortest presidency William Henry Harrison When Harrison came to Washington, he wanted to show both that he was still the steadfast hero of Tippecanoe, and that he was a better educated and thoughtful man than the backwoods caricature portrayed in the campaign. He took the oath of office on Thursday, March 4, 1841, a cold and wet day. He wore neither an overcoat nor hat, rode on horseback to the ceremony rather than in the closed carriage that had been offered him, and delivered the longest inaugural address in American history. At 8,445 words, it took him nearly two hours to read, although his friend and fellow Whig Daniel Webster had edited it for length. After becoming the first head of state to have his photograph taken, Harrison then rode through the streets in the inaugural parade, and that evening attended three inaugural balls, including one at Carusis Saloon entitled the Tippecanoe ball, which at a price of US10 per person attracted 1,000 guests. The inaugural address was a detailed statement of the Whig agenda, essentially a repudiation of Jackson and Van Burens policies. Harrison promised to reestablish the Bank of the United States and extend its capacity for credit by issuing paper currency to defer to the judgment of Congress on legislative matters, with sparing use of his veto power and to reverse Jacksons spoils system of executive patronage. He promised to use patronage to create a qualified staff, not to enhance his own standing in government. As leader of the Whigs and a powerful legislator , Henry Clay expected to have substantial influence in the Harrison administration. He ignored his own platform plank of overturning the spoils system. Clay attempted to influence Harrisons actions before and during his brief presidency, especially in putting forth his own preferences for Cabinet offices and other presidential appointments. Harrison rebuffed his aggression, saying Mr. Clay, you forget that I am the President. The dispute intensified when Harrison named Daniel Webster, Clays archrival for control of the Whig Party, as his Secretary of State, and appeared to give Websters supporters some highly coveted patronage positions. Harrisons sole concession to Clay was to name his protg John J. Crittenden to the post of Attorney General. Despite this, the dispute continued until the Presidents death. Clay was not the only one who hoped to benefit from Harrisons election. Hordes of office applicants came to the White House, which was then open to all who wanted a meeting with the President. Most of Harrisons business during his monthlong presidency involved extensive social obligations an inevitable part of his high position and arrival in Washington and receiving visitors at the White House. They awaited him at all hours and filled the Executive Mansion. Harrison wrote in a letter dated March 10, I am so much harassed by the multitude that call upon me that I can give no proper attention to any business of my own.Letter from Harrison to R. Buchanan, Esq., March 10, 184 1 Nevertheless, Harrison sent a number of nominations for office to the Senate for confirmation during his month in office. The new 27th Congress had convened an extraordinary session for the purpose of confirming Harrisons cabinet and other important nominees, since a number of them arrived after Congress March 15 adjournment however, John Tyler would ultimately be forced to renominate many of Harrisons selections.Harrison took his pledge to reform executive appointments seriously, visiting each of the six executive departments to observe its operations and issuing through Webster an order to all departments that electioneering by employees would henceforth be considered grounds for dismissal. As he had with Clay, Harrison resisted pressure from other Whigs over partisan patronage. When a group arrived in his office on March 16 to demand the removal of all Democrats from any appointed office, Harrison proclaimed, So help me God, I will resign my office before I can be guilty of such an iniquity Harrisons own cabinet attempted to countermand the presidents appointment of John Chambers as Governor of Iowa in favor of Websters friend, General James Wilson when Webster attempted to press this decision at a March 25 cabinet meeting, however, Harrison asked him to read aloud a handwritten note , then announced that William Henry Harrison, President of the United States, tells you, gentlemen, that, by God, John Chambers shall be governor of Iowa Harrisons only official act of consequence was to call Congress into a special session. Henry Clay and he had disagreed over the necessity of such a session, and when on March 11 Harrisons cabinet proved evenly divided, the president vetoed the idea. When Clay pressed Harrison on the special session on March 13, the president rebuffed his counsel and told him not to visit the White House again, but to address him only in writing. A few days later, however, Treasury Secretary Thomas Ewing reported to Harrison that federal funds were in such trouble that the government could not continue to operate until Congress regularly scheduled session in December Harrison thus relented, and on March 17 proclaimed the special session in the interests of the condition of the revenue and finance of the country. The session was scheduled to begin on May 31. Administration and cabinet Official White House portrait by James Reid Lambdin Death and funeral Death of Harrison, April 4, 1841 On March 26, 1841, Harrison became ill with a cold according to the prevailing medical misconception of that time, his illness was believed to be caused by the bad weather at his inauguration, but the illness did not arise until more than three weeks afterwards. Harrison tried to rest in the White House, but could not find a quiet room because of the steady crowd of office seekers. His extremely busy social schedule also made rest time scarce. Harrisons doctors tried several cures, such as applying opium, castor oil, leeches, and Virginia snakeweed, but the treatments only made Harrison worse and he became delirious. He died nine days after becoming ill, at 1230a.m. on Sunday, April 4, 1841. Harrisons doctor, Thomas Miller, diagnosed Harrisons cause of death as pneumonia of the lower lobe of the right lung. A medical analysis made in 2014, based on Dr. Millers notes and records of the White House water supply being downstream of public sewage, concluding that he likely died of septic shock due to enteric fever. Harrison became the first United States president to die in office. His last words were to his doctor, but they were assumed to be directed at Vice President Tyler Sir, I wish you to understand the true principles of the government. I wish them carried out. I ask nothing more. Harrison served the shortest term of any American president March 4 April 4, 1841, 30 days, 12 hours, and 30 minutes. The Presidents body was born through Washington. Solomon Northup, gave an account of the procession in Twelve Years a Slave Twelve Years a Slave Narrative of Solomon Northup, a Citizen of NewYork, Kidnapped in Washington City in 1841, and Rescued in 1853 Harrisons funeral took place in the Wesley Chapel in Cincinnati, Ohio, on April 7, 1841. His original interment was in the public vault of the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C., but his remains were later buried in North Bend, Ohio. The William Henry Harrison Tomb State Memorial was erected at the gravesite in his honor. Impact of death The William Henry Harrison Memorial in North Bend, Ohio Harrisons death was a disappointment to Whigs, who hoped to pass a revenue tariff and enact measures to support Henry Clays American system. John Tyler, Harrisons successor and a former Democrat, abandoned the Whig agenda, effectively cutting himself off from the party. Due to the death of Harrison, three Presidents served within a single calendar year . This has happened on only one other occasion, 40 years later in 1881, when Rutherford B. Hayes was succeeded by James A. Garfield, who was assassinated later that year. With the death of Garfield, Chester A. Arthur stepped into the presidency. Harrisons death revealed the flaws in the U.S. Constitutions clauses on presidential succession. Article II of the Constitution states In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death, Resignation, or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the Same shall devolve on the Vice President... and Vice President shall act accordingly, until the Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected. Scholars at the time disagreed whether the Vice President would become president or merely acting President. The Constitution did not stipulate whether the Vice President could serve the remainder of the Presidents term, until the next election, or if emergency elections should be held. Harrisons cabinet insisted that Tyler was Vice President acting as President. After the cabinet consulted with the Chief Justice Roger Taney, they decided that if Tyler took the presidential Oath of Office, he would assume the office of President. Tyler obliged and was sworn into office on April 6, 1841. Congress convened in May, and after a short period of debate in both houses, it passed a resolution that confirmed Tyler as president for the remainder of Harrisons term. Once established, this precedent of presidential succession remained in effect until the Twentyfifth Amendment was ratified in 1967, following the assassination of John F. Kennedy and the succession of Lyndon B. Johnson to the presidency in 1963. The Twentyfifth Amendment dealt with the finer points of succession, defining the situations in which the Vice President would serve as acting President, and in which situations the Vice President could become President. Legacy Historical reputation left Among Harrisons most enduring legacies is the series of treaties that he either negotiated or signed with Native American leaders during his tenure as the Indiana territorial governor. As part of the treaty negotiations, the native tribes ceded large tracts of land in the west that provided additional acreage for purchase and settlement. Harrisons chief presidential legacy lies in his campaigning methods, which laid the foundation for the modern presidential campaign tactics. Harrison was the first sitting incumbent President to have his photograph taken. The image was made in Washington, D.C., on his inauguration day in 1841. Photographs exist of John Quincy Adams, Andrew Jackson, and Martin Van Buren, but these images were taken after they left office. The Harrison image was also the first presidential photograph. The original daguerreotype of Harrison on his inauguration day has been lost although at least one early photographic copy exists in the archives of the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Harrison died nearly penniless. Congress voted his wife, Anna, a presidential widows pension of 25,000, one year of Harrisons salary . She also received the right to mail letters free of charge. Harrisons son, John Scott Harrison, represented Ohio in the U.S. House of Representatives between 1853 and 1857. Harrisons grandson, Benjamin Harrison of Indiana, served as the 23rd U.S. president from 1889 to 1893, making William and Benjamin Harrison the only grandparent grandchild pair of U.S. presidents. Honors and tributes left On February 19, 2009, the U.S. Mint released the ninth coin in the Presidential 1 Coin Program, bearing Harrisons likeness. A total of 98,420,000 coins were minted. Statue of Harrison on horseback in Cincinnati Several monuments and memorial statues have been erected in tribute to Harrison. There are public statues of him in downtown Indianapolis, Cincinnatis Piatt Park, the Tippecanoe County Courthouse, Harrison County, Indiana, and Owen County, Indiana. Numerous counties and towns also bear his name. See also Curse of Tippecanoe List of Governors of Indiana List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience List of Presidents of the United States who died in office Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps References Citations Bibliography compiled by Lecuna, Vicente, translated by Bertrand, Lewis for children Further reading as read to the Filson Club. Shade, William G. Tippecanoe and Tyler too William Henry Harrison and the rise of popular politics. in Joel H. Silbey, ed., A Companion to the Antebellum Presidents 1837 1861 pp 155 72. Skaggs, David Curtis. William Henry Harrison and the Conquest of the Ohio Country Frontier Fighting in the War of 1812 xxii. External links White House biography William Henry Harrison Papers Library of Congress Papers of William Henry Harrison, 1800 1815, Collection Guide, Indiana Historical Society Announcement of William Henry Harrison Impending Death William Henry Harrison ALS, March 10, 1841 Harassed by the Multitudes William Henry Harrisons Personal Correspondence While in Office Shapell Manuscript Foundation Essays on Harrison, each member of his cabinet and First Lady William Henry Harrison Biography and Fact File Biography by Appletons and Stanley L. Klos William Henry Harrison Young Tippecanoe Life Portrait of William Henry Harrison, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , May 10, 1999 Category1773 births Category1841 deaths Category18thcentury American Episcopalians Category19thcentury American Episcopalians Category19thcentury American diplomats Category19thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican military personnel of the War of 1812 CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of the Northwest Indian War CategoryBurials in Ohio CategoryCarter family of Virginia CategoryCongressional Gold Medal recipients CategoryDeaths from pneumonia CategoryDeaths from sepsis CategoryDelegates to the United States House of Representatives from the Northwest Territory CategoryDemocraticRepublican Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryGovernors of Indiana Territory CategoryHampden Sydney College alumni CategoryHarrison family of Virginia CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryInfectious disease deaths in Washington, D.C. CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Ohio CategoryNational Republican Party United States Senators CategoryOhio DemocraticRepublicans CategoryOhio Whigs CategoryPeople from Charles City County, Virginia CategoryPeople from Vincennes, Indiana CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryPresidents of the United States who died while in office CategoryUnited States Army generals CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1836 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1840 CategoryUnited States presidential electors, 1820 CategoryUnited States presidential electors, 1824 CategoryUnited States Senators from Ohio CategoryUniversity of Pennsylvania alumni CategoryWhig Party Presidents of the United States CategoryWhig Party presidential nominees CategoryAmerican slaveowners
William McKinley was the 25th President of the United States from March 4, 1897 until his assassination in September 1901, six months into his second term. McKinley led the nation to victory in the Spanish American War, raised protective tariffs to promote American industry, and maintained the nation on the gold standard in a rejection of inflationary proposals. McKinley was the last president to have served in the American Civil War, and the only one to have started the war as an enlisted soldier, beginning as a private in the Union Army and ending as a brevet major. After the war, he settled in Canton, Ohio, where he practiced law and married Ida Saxton. In 1876, he was elected to Congress, where he became the Republican Partys expert on the protective tariff, which he promised would bring prosperity. His 1890 McKinley Tariff was highly controversial which together with a Democratic redistricting aimed at gerrymandering him out of office, led to his defeat in the Democratic landslide of 1890. He was elected Ohios governor in 1891 and 1893, steering a moderate course between capital and labor interests. With the aid of his close adviser Mark Hanna, he secured the Republican nomination for president in 1896, amid a deep economic depression. He defeated his Democratic rival, William Jennings Bryan, after a frontporch campaign in which he advocated sound money and promised that high tariffs would restore prosperity. Rapid economic growth marked McKinleys presidency. He promoted the 1897 Dingley Tariff to protect manufacturers and factory workers from foreign competition, and in 1900, he secured the passage of the Gold Standard Act. McKinley hoped to persuade Spain to grant independence to rebellious Cuba without conflict, but when negotiation failed, he led the nation into the Spanish American War of 1898 the U.S. victory was quick and decisive. As part of the peace settlement, Spain turned over to the United States its main overseas colonies of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines Cuba was promised independence, but at that time remained under the control of the U.S. Army. The United States annexed the independent Republic of Hawaii in 1898 and it became a U.S. territory. Historians regard McKinleys 1896 victory as a realigning election, in which the political stalemate of the post Civil War era gave way to the Republicandominated Fourth Party System, which began with the Progressive Era. McKinley defeated Bryan again in the 1900 presidential election, in a campaign focused on imperialism, protectionism, and free silver. However, his legacy was quickly cut short when he was shot on September 6, 1901 by Leon Czolgosz, a secondgeneration PolishAmerican with anarchist leanings McKinley died eight days later, and was succeeded by his Vice President Theodore Roosevelt. As an innovator of American interventionism and probusiness sentiment, McKinleys presidency is generally considered above average, though his universally positive public perception was soon overshadowed by Roosevelt. Early life and family William McKinley at age 15 William McKinley Jr. was born in 1843 in Niles, Ohio, the seventh child of William McKinley Sr. and Nancy McKinley . The McKinleys were of English and ScotsIrish descent and had settled in western Pennsylvania in the 18th century, tracing back to a David McKinley who was born in Dervock, County Antrim, in presentday Northern Ireland. There, the elder McKinley was born in Pine Township, Mercer County. The family moved to Ohio when the senior McKinley was a boy, settling in New Lisbon . He met Nancy Allison there, and married her later. The Allison family was of mostly English descent and among Pennsylvanias earliest settlers. The family trade on both sides was ironmaking, and McKinley senior operated foundries throughout Ohio, in New Lisbon, Niles, Poland, and finally Canton. The McKinley household was, like many from Ohios Western Reserve, steeped in Whiggish and abolitionist sentiment, the latter based on the familys staunch Methodist beliefs. William followed in the Methodist tradition, becoming active in the local Methodist church at the age of sixteen. He was a lifelong pious Methodist. In 1852, the family moved from Niles to Poland, Ohio so that their children could attend the better schools there. Graduating from Poland Seminary in 1859, he enrolled the following year at Allegheny College in Meadville, Pennsylvania. He remained at Allegheny for only one year, returning home in 1860 after becoming ill and depressed. He also spent time at Mount Union College in Alliance, Ohio as a board member. Although his health recovered, family finances declined and McKinley was unable to return to Allegheny, first working as a postal clerk and later taking a job teaching at a school near Poland, Ohio. Civil War Western Virginia and Antietam Rutherford B. Hayes was McKinleys mentor during the Civil War and afterward. When the Southern states seceded from the Union and the American Civil War began, thousands of men in Ohio volunteered for service. Among them were McKinley and his cousin William McKinley Osbourne, who enlisted as privates in the newly formed Poland Guards in June 1861. The men left for Columbus where they were consolidated with other small units to form the 23rd Ohio Infantry. The men were unhappy to learn that, unlike Ohios earlier volunteer regiments, they would not be permitted to elect their officers they would be designated by Ohios governor, William Dennison. Dennison appointed Colonel William Rosecrans as the commander of the regiment, and the men began training on the outskirts of Columbus. McKinley quickly took to the soldiers life and wrote a series of letters to his hometown newspaper extolling the army and the Union cause. Delays in issuance of uniforms and weapons again brought the men into conflict with their officers, but Major Rutherford B. Hayes convinced them to accept what the government had issued them his style in dealing with the men impressed McKinley, beginning an association and friendship that would last until Hayes death in 1893. After a month of training, McKinley and the 23rd Ohio, now led by Colonel Eliakim P. Scammon, set out for western Virginia in July 1861 as a part of the Kanawha Division. McKinley initially thought Scammon was a martinet, but when the regiment finally saw battle, he came to appreciate the value of their relentless drilling. Their first contact with the enemy came in September when they drove back Confederate troops at Carnifex Ferry in presentday West Virginia. Three days after the battle, McKinley was assigned to duty in the brigade quartermaster office, where he worked both to supply his regiment, and as a clerk. In November, the regiment established winter quarters near Fayetteville . McKinley spent the winter substituting for a commissary sergeant who was ill, and in April 1862 he was promoted to that rank. The regiment resumed its advance that spring with Hayes in command and fought several minor engagements against the rebel forces. That September, McKinleys regiment was called east to reinforce General John Popes Army of Virginia at the Second Battle of Bull Run. Delayed in passing through Washington, D.C., the 23rd Ohio did not arrive in time for the battle, but joined the Army of the Potomac as it hurried north to cut off Robert E. Lees Army of Northern Virginia as it advanced into Maryland. The 23rd was the first regiment to encounter the Confederates at the Battle of South Mountain on September 14. After severe losses, Union forces drove back the Confederates and continued to Sharpsburg, Maryland, where they engaged Lees army at the Battle of Antietam, one of the bloodiest battles of the war. The 23rd was also in the thick of the fighting at Antietam, and McKinley himself came under heavy fire when bringing rations to the men on the line. McKinleys regiment again suffered many casualties, but the Army of the Potomac was victorious and the Confederates retreated into Virginia. The regiment was then detached from the Army of the Potomac and returned by train to western Virginia. Shenandoah Valley and promotion McKinley in 1865, just after the war. Photograph by Mathew Brady. While the regiment went into winter quarters near Charleston, Virginia , McKinley was ordered back to Ohio with some other sergeants to recruit fresh troops. When they arrived in Columbus, Governor David Tod surprised McKinley with a commission as second lieutenant in recognition of his service at Antietam. McKinley and his comrades saw little action until July 1863, when the division skirmished with John Hunt Morgans cavalry at the Battle of Buffington Island. Early in 1864, the Army command structure in West Virginia was reorganized, and the division was assigned to George Crooks Army of West Virginia. They soon resumed the offensive, marching into southwestern Virginia to destroy salt and lead mines used by the enemy. On May 9, the army engaged Confederate troops at Cloyds Mountain, where the men charged the enemy entrenchments and drove the rebels from the field. McKinley later said the combat there was as desperate as any witnessed during the war. Following the rout, the Union forces destroyed Confederate supplies and skirmished with the enemy again successfully. McKinley and his regiment moved to the Shenandoah Valley as the armies broke from winter quarters to resume hostilities. Crooks corps was attached to Major General David Hunters Army of the Shenandoah and soon back in contact with Confederate forces, capturing Lexington, Virginia, on June 11. They continued south toward Lynchburg, tearing up railroad track as they advanced. Hunter believed the troops at Lynchburg were too powerful, however, and the brigade returned to West Virginia. Before the army could make another attempt, Confederate General Jubal Earlys raid into Maryland forced their recall to the north. Earlys army surprised them at Kernstown on July 24, where McKinley came under heavy fire and the army was defeated. Retreating into Maryland, the army was reorganized again Major General Philip Sheridan replaced Hunter, and McKinley, who had been promoted to captain after the battle, was transferred to General Crooks staff. By August, Early was retreating south in the valley, with Sheridans army in pursuit. They fended off a Confederate assault at Berryville, where McKinley had a horse shot out from under him, and advanced to Opequon Creek, where they broke the enemy lines and pursued them farther south. They followed up the victory with another at Fishers Hill on September 22, and were engaged once more at Cedar Creek on October 19. After initially falling back from the Confederate advance, McKinley helped to rally the troops and turn the tide of the battle. After Cedar Creek, the army stayed in the vicinity through election day, when McKinley cast his first presidential ballot, for the incumbent Republican, Abraham Lincoln. The next day, they moved north up the valley into winter quarters near Kernstown. In February 1865, Crook was captured by Confederate raiders. Crooks capture added to the confusion as the army was reorganized for the spring campaign, and McKinley found himself serving on the staffs of four different generals over the next fifteen days Crook, John D. Stevenson, Samuel S. Carroll, and Winfield S. Hancock. Finally assigned to Carrolls staff again, McKinley acted as the generals first and only adjutant. Lee and his army surrendered to General Ulysses S. Grant a few days later, effectively ending the war. McKinley found time to join a Freemason lodge in Winchester, Virginia, before he and Carroll were transferred to Hancocks First Veterans Corps in Washington. Just before the wars end, McKinley received his final promotion, a brevet commission as major. In July, the Veterans Corps was mustered out of service, and McKinley and Carroll were relieved of their duties. Carroll and Hancock encouraged McKinley to apply for a place in the peacetime army, but he declined and returned to Ohio the following month. On March 7, 1883, McKinley was elected as a First Class Companion of the District of Columbia Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States a military society of officers who served in the Union armed forces during the American Civil War and their descendants. He was assigned MOLLUS insignia number 3029. McKinley, along with Samuel M. Taylor and James C. Howe, coauthored and published a twelve volume work, Official Roster of the Soldiers of the State of Ohio in the War of the Rebellion, 1861 1866 published in 1886.McKinley, Taylor, Howe, 1886 Legal career and marriage Ida Saxton McKinley Katherine McKinley After the war ended in 1865, McKinley decided on a career in the law and began studying in the office of an attorney in Poland, Ohio. The following year, he continued his studies by attending Albany Law School in New York. After studying there for less than a year, McKinley returned home and was admitted to the bar in Warren, Ohio, in March 1867. That same year, he moved to Canton, the county seat of Stark County, and set up a small office. He soon formed a partnership with George W. Belden, an experienced lawyer and former judge. His practice was successful enough for him to buy a block of buildings on Main Street in Canton, which provided him with a small but consistent rental income for decades to come. When his Army friend Rutherford B. Hayes was nominated for governor in 1867, McKinley made speeches on his behalf in Stark County, his first foray into politics. The county was closely divided between Democrats and Republicans, but Hayes carried it that year in his statewide victory. In 1869, McKinley ran for the office of prosecuting attorney of Stark County, an office usually then held by Democrats, and was unexpectedly elected. When McKinley ran for reelection in 1871, the Democrats nominated William A. Lynch, a prominent local lawyer, and McKinley was defeated by 143 votes. As McKinleys professional career progressed, so too did his social life blossom as he wooed Ida Saxton, the daughter of a prominent Canton family. They were married on January 25, 1871, in the newly built First Presbyterian Church of Canton, although Ida soon joined her husbands Methodist church. Their first child, Katherine, was born on Christmas Day 1871. A second daughter, Ida, followed in 1873, but died the same year. McKinleys wife descended into a deep depression at her babys death and her health, never robust, grew worse. Two years later, in 1875, Katherine died of typhoid fever. Ida never recovered from her daughters deaths the McKinleys had no more children. Ida McKinley developed epilepsy around the same time and thereafter disliked her husbands leaving her side. He remained a devoted husband and tended to his wifes medical and emotional needs for the rest of his life. Ida insisted that McKinley continue his increasingly successful career in law and politics. He attended the state Republican convention that nominated Hayes for a third term as governor in 1875, and campaigned again for his old friend in the election that fall. The next year, McKinley undertook a highprofile case defending a group of coal miners arrested for rioting after a clash with strikebreakers. Lynch, McKinleys opponent in the 1871 election, and his partner, William R. Day, were the opposing counsel, and the mine owners included Mark Hanna, a Cleveland businessman. Taking the case pro bono, he was successful in getting all but one of the miners acquitted. The case raised McKinleys standing among laborers, a crucial part of the Stark County electorate, and also introduced him to Hanna, who would become his strongest backer in years to come. McKinleys good standing with labor became useful that year as he campaigned for the Republican nomination for Ohios 17th congressional district. Delegates to the county conventions thought he could attract bluecollar voters, and in August 1876, McKinley was nominated. By that time, Hayes had been nominated for president, and McKinley campaigned for him while running his own congressional campaign. Both were successful. McKinley, campaigning mostly on his support for a protective tariff, defeated the Democratic nominee, Levi L. Lamborn, by 3,300 votes, while Hayes won a hotly disputed election to reach the presidency. McKinleys victory came at a personal cost his income as a congressman would be half of what he earned as a lawyer. Rising politician 1877 1895 Spokesman for protection Representative McKinley Under free trade the trader is the master and the producer the slave. Protection is but the law of nature, the law of selfpreservation, of selfdevelopment, of securing the highest and best destiny of the race of man. is said that protection is immoral.... Why, if protection builds up and elevates 63,000,000 U.S. population of people, the influence of those 63,000,000 of people elevates the rest of the world. We cannot take a step in the pathway of progress without benefiting mankind everywhere. Well, they say, Buy where you can buy the cheapest.... Of course, that applies to labor as to everything else. Let me give you a maxim that is a thousand times better than that, and it is the protection maxim Buy where you can pay the easiest. And that spot of earth is where labor wins its highest rewards.William McKinley speech, Oct. 4, 1892 in Boston, MA William McKinley Papers McKinley first took his congressional seat in October 1877, when President Hayes summoned Congress into special session. With the Republicans in the minority, McKinley was given unimportant committee assignments, which he undertook conscientiously. McKinleys friendship with Hayes did McKinley little good on Capitol Hill the President was not wellregarded by many leaders there. The young congressman broke with Hayes on the question of the currency, but it did not affect their friendship. The United States had effectively been placed on the gold standard by the Coinage Act of 1873 when silver prices dropped significantly, many sought to make silver again a legal tender, equally with gold. Such a course would be inflationary, but advocates argued that the economic benefits of the increased money supply would be worth the inflation opponents warned that free silver would not bring the promised benefits and would harm the United States in international trade. McKinley voted for the Bland Allison Act of 1878, which mandated large government purchases of silver for striking into money, and also joined the large majorities in each house that overrode Hayes veto of the legislation. In so doing, McKinley voted against the position of the House Republican leader, his fellow Ohioan and friend, James Garfield. From his first term in Congress, McKinley was a strong advocate of protective tariffs. The primary purposes of such imposts was not to raise revenue, but to allow American manufacturing to develop by giving it a price advantage in the domestic market over foreign competitors. McKinley biographer Margaret Leech noted that Canton had become prosperous as a center for the manufacture of farm equipment because of protection, and that this may have helped form his political views. McKinley introduced and supported bills that raised protective tariffs, and opposed those that lowered them or imposed tariffs simply to raise revenue. Garfields election as president in 1880 created a vacancy on the House Ways and Means Committee McKinley was selected to fill it, placing him on the most powerful committee after only two terms. McKinley increasingly became a significant figure in national politics. In 1880, he served a brief term as Ohios representative on the Republican National Committee. In 1884, he was elected a delegate to that years Republican convention, where he served as chair of the Committee on Resolutions and won plaudits for his handling of the convention when called upon to preside. By 1886, McKinley, Senator John Sherman, and Governor Joseph B. Foraker were considered the leaders of the Republican party in Ohio. Sherman, who had helped to found the Republican Party, ran three times for the Republican nomination for president in the 1880s, each time failing, while Foraker began a meteoric rise in Ohio politics early in the decade. Hanna, once he entered public affairs as a political manager and generous contributor, supported Shermans ambitions, as well as those of Foraker. The latter relationship broke off at the 1888 Republican National Convention, where McKinley, Foraker, and Hanna were all delegates supporting Sherman. Convinced Sherman could not win, Foraker threw his support to the unsuccessful Republican 1884 presidential nominee, Maine Senator James G. Blaine. When Blaine stated he was not a candidate, Foraker returned to Sherman, but the nomination went to former Indiana senator Benjamin Harrison, who was elected president. In the bitterness that followed the convention, Hanna abandoned Foraker, and for the rest of McKinleys life, the Ohio Republican Party was divided into two factions, one aligned with McKinley, Sherman, and Hanna and the other with Foraker. Hanna came to admire McKinley and became a friend and close adviser to him. Although Hanna remained active in business and in promoting other Republicans, in the years after 1888, he spent an increasing amount of time boosting McKinleys political career. In 1889, with the Republicans in the majority, McKinley sought election as Speaker of the House. He failed to gain the post, which went to Thomas B. Reed of Maine however, Speaker Reed appointed McKinley chairman of the Ways and Means Committee. The Ohioan guided the McKinley Tariff of 1890 through Congress although McKinleys work was altered through the influence of special interests in the Senate, it imposed a number of protective tariffs on foreign goods. Gerrymandering and defeat for reelection Recognizing McKinleys potential, the Democrats, whenever they controlled the Ohio legislature, sought to gerrymander or redistrict him out of office. In 1878, McKinley faced election in a redrawn 17th district he won anyway, causing Hayes to exult, Oh, the good luck of McKinley He was gerrymandered out and then beat the gerrymander We enjoyed it as much as he did. After the 1882 election, McKinley was unseated on an election contest by a near partyline House vote. Out of office, he was briefly depressed by the setback, but soon vowed to run again. The Democrats again redistricted Stark County for the 1884 election McKinley was returned to Congress anyway. Judge magazine cover from September 1890, showing McKinley having helped dispatch Speaker Reeds opponent in earlyvoting Maine, hurrying off with the victor to McKinleys gerrymandered Ohio district For 1890, the Democrats gerrymandered McKinley one final time, placing Stark County in the same district as one of the strongest proDemocrat counties, Holmes, populated by solidly Democratic Pennsylvania Dutch. The new boundaries seemed good, based on past results, for a Democratic majority of 2000 to 3000. The Republicans could not reverse the gerrymander as legislative elections would not be held until 1891, but they could throw all their energies into the district, as the McKinley Tariff was a main theme of the Democratic campaign nationwide, and there was considerable attention paid to McKinleys race. The Republican Party sent its leading orators to Canton, including Blaine , Speaker Reed and President Harrison. The Democrats countered with their best spokesmen on tariff issues. McKinley tirelessly stumped his new district, reaching out to its 40,000 voters to explain that his tariff Democrats ran a strong candidate in former lieutenant governor John G. Warwick. To drive their point home, they hired young partisans to pretend to be peddlers, who went door to door offering 25cent tinware to housewives for 50 cents, explaining the rise in prices was due to the McKinley Tariff. In the end, McKinley lost by 300 votes, but the Republicans won a statewide majority and claimed a moral victory. Governor of Ohio Even before McKinley completed his term in Congress, he met with a delegation of Ohioans urging him to run for governor. Governor James E. Campbell, a Democrat, who had defeated Foraker in 1889, was to seek reelection in 1891. The Ohio Republican party remained divided, but McKinley quietly arranged for Foraker to nominate him at the 1891 state Republican convention, which chose McKinley by acclamation. The former congressman spent much of the second half of 1891 campaigning against Campbell, beginning in his birthplace of Niles. Hanna, however, was little seen in the campaign he spent much of his time raising funds for the election of legislators pledged to vote for Sherman in the 1892 senatorial election. McKinley won the 1891 election by some 20,000 votes the following January, Sherman, with considerable assistance from Hanna, turned back a challenge by Foraker to win the legislatures vote for another term in the Senate. Even after his final run for president in 1884, James G. Blaine was still seen as a possible candidate for the Republican nomination. In this 1890 Puck cartoon, he is startling Reed and McKinley as they make their plans for 1892. Ohios governor had relatively little power for example, he could recommend legislation, but not veto it but with Ohio a key swing state, its governor was a major figure in national politics. Although McKinley believed that the health of the nation depended on that of business, he was evenhanded in dealing with labor. He procured legislation that set up an arbitration board to settle work disputes and obtained passage of a law that fined employers who fired workers for belonging to a union. President Harrison had proven unpopular there were divisions even within the Republican party as the year 1892 began and Harrison began his reelection drive. Although no declared candidate opposed Harrison, many Republicans were ready to dump the President from the ticket if an alternative emerged. Among the possible candidates spoken of were McKinley, Reed, and the aging Blaine. Fearing that the Ohio governor would emerge as a candidate, Harrisons managers arranged for McKinley to be permanent chairman of the convention in Minneapolis, requiring him to play a public, neutral role. Hanna established an unofficial McKinley headquarters near the convention hall, though no active effort was made to convert delegates to McKinleys cause. McKinley objected to delegate votes being cast for him nevertheless he finished third, behind the renominated Harrison, and behind Blaine, who had sent word he did not want to be considered. Although McKinley campaigned loyally for the Republican ticket, Harrison was defeated by former President Cleveland in the November election. In the wake of Clevelands victory, McKinley was seen by some as the likely Republican candidate in 1896. Soon after Clevelands return to office, hard times struck the nation with the Panic of 1893. A businessman in Youngstown, Robert Walker, had lent money to McKinley in their younger days in gratitude, McKinley had often guaranteed Walkers borrowings for his business. The governor had never kept track of what he was signing he believed Walker a sound businessman. In fact, Walker had deceived McKinley, telling him that new notes were actually renewals of matured ones. Walker was ruined by the recession McKinley was called upon for repayment in February 1893. The total owed was over 100,000 and a despairing McKinley initially proposed to resign as governor and earn the money as an attorney. Instead, McKinleys wealthy supporters, including Hanna and Chicago publisher H. H. Kohlsaat, became trustees of a fund from which the notes would be paid. Both William and Ida McKinley placed their property in the hands of the funds trustees , and the supporters raised and contributed a substantial sum of money. All of the couples property was returned to them by the end of 1893, and when McKinley, who had promised eventual repayment, asked for the list of contributors, it was refused him. Many people who had suffered in the hard times sympathized with McKinley, whose popularity grew. He was easily reelected in November 1893, receiving the largest percentage of the vote of any Ohio governor since the Civil War. McKinley campaigned widely for Republicans in the 1894 midterm congressional elections many party candidates in districts where he spoke were successful. His political efforts in Ohio were rewarded with the election in November 1895 of a Republican successor as governor, Asa Bushnell, and a Republican legislature that elected Foraker to the Senate. McKinley supported Foraker for Senate and Bushnell for governor in return, the new senatorelect agreed to back McKinleys presidential ambitions. With party peace in Ohio assured, McKinley turned to the national arena. Election of 1896 Obtaining the nomination McKinleys close friend and adviser, Mark Hanna It is unclear when William McKinley began to seriously prepare a run for president. As Phillips notes, no documents, no diaries, no confidential letters to Mark Hanna contain his secret hopes or veiled stratagems. From the beginning, McKinleys preparations had the participation of Hanna, whose biographer William T. Horner noted, what is certainly true is that in 1888 the two men began to develop a close working relationship that helped put McKinley in the White House. Sherman did not run for president again after 1888, and so Hanna could support McKinleys ambitions for that office wholeheartedly. Backed by Hannas money and organizational skills, McKinley quietly built support for a presidential bid through 1895 and early 1896. When other contenders such as Speaker Reed and Iowa Senator William B. Allison sent agents outside their states to organize Republicans in support of their candidacies, they found that Hannas agents had preceded them. According to historian Stanley Jones in his study of the 1896 election, Hanna, on McKinleys behalf, met with the eastern Republican political bosses, such as Senators Thomas Platt of New York and Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania, who were willing to guarantee McKinleys nomination in exchange for promises regarding patronage and offices. McKinley, however, was determined to obtain the nomination without making deals, and Hanna accepted that decision. Many of their early efforts were focused on the South Hanna obtained a vacation home in southern Georgia where McKinley visited and met with Republican politicians from the region. McKinley needed 453 delegate votes to gain the nomination he gained nearly half that number from the South and border states. Platt lamented in his memoirs, Hanna had the South practically solid before some of us awakened. Louis Dalrymple cartoon from Puck magazine, June 24, 1896, showing McKinley about to crown himself with the Republican nomination. The priests are Hanna and Representative Charles H. Grosvenor H. H. Kohlsaat is the page holding the robe. The bosses still hoped to deny McKinley a firstballot majority at the convention by boosting support for local favorite son candidates such as Quay, New York Governor Levi P. Morton, and Illinois Senator Shelby Cullom. Delegaterich Illinois proved a crucial battleground, as McKinley supporters, such as Chicago businessman Charles G. Dawes, sought to elect delegates pledged to vote for McKinley at the national convention in St. Louis. Cullom proved unable to stand against McKinley despite the support of local Republican machines at the state convention at the end of April, McKinley completed a nearsweep of Illinois delegates. Former president Harrison had been deemed a possible contender if he entered the race when Harrison made it known he would not seek a third nomination, the McKinley organization took control of Indiana with a speed Harrison privately found unseemly. Morton operatives who journeyed to Indiana sent word back that they had found the state alive for McKinley. Wyoming Senator Francis Warren wrote, The politicians are making a hard fight against him, but if the masses could speak, McKinley is the choice of at least 75 of the entire of Republican voters in the Union. By the time the national convention began in St. Louis on June 16, 1896, McKinley had an ample majority of delegates. The former governor, who remained in Canton, followed events at the convention closely by telephone, and was able to hear part of Forakers speech nominating him over the line. When Ohio was reached in the roll call of states, its votes gave McKinley the nomination, which he celebrated by hugging his wife and mother as his friends fled the house, anticipating the first of many crowds that gathered at the Republican candidates home. Thousands of partisans came from Canton and surrounding towns that evening to hear McKinley speak from his front porch. The convention nominated Republican National Committee vice chairman Garret Hobart of New Jersey for vice president, a choice actually made, by most accounts, by Hanna. Hobart, a wealthy lawyer, businessman, and former state legislator, was not widely known, but as Hanna biographer Herbert Croly pointed out, if he did little to strengthen the ticket he did nothing to weaken it. General election campaign altA political cartoon. An imperially confidentlooking man in an exaggerated military officers uniform is riding a plank of wood marked Financial question, which is balanced between two sawhorses. The mans weight is bending the wood rather dramatically. Before the Republican convention, McKinley had been a straddle bug on the currency question, favoring moderate positions on silver such as accomplishing bimetallism by international agreement. In the final days before the convention, McKinley decided, after hearing from politicians and businessmen, that the platform should endorse the gold standard, though it should allow for bimetallism by international agreement. Adoption of the platform caused some western delegates, led by Colorado Senator Henry M. Teller, to walk out of the convention. However, compared with the Democrats, Republican divisions on the issue were small, especially as McKinley promised future concessions to silver advocates. The bad economic times had continued, and strengthened the hand of forces for free silver. The issue bitterly divided the Democratic Party President Cleveland firmly supported the gold standard, but an increasing number of rural Democrats wanted silver, especially in the South and West. The silverites took control of the 1896 Democratic National Convention and chose William Jennings Bryan for president he had electrified the delegates with his Cross of Gold speech. Bryans financial radicalism shocked bankers they thought his inflationary program would bankrupt the railroads and ruin the economy. Hanna approached them for support for his strategy to win the election, and they gave 3.5 million for speakers and over 200million pamphlets advocating the Republican position on the money and tariff questions. Bryans campaign had at most an estimated 500,000. With his eloquence and youthful energy his major assets in the race, Bryan decided on a whistlestop political tour by train on an unprecedented scale. Hanna urged McKinley to match Bryans tour with one of his own the candidate declined on the grounds that the Democrat was a better stump speaker I might just as well set up a trapeze on my front lawn and compete with some professional athlete as go out speaking against Bryan. I have to think when I speak. Instead of going to the people, McKinley would remain at home in Canton and allow the people to come to him according to historian R. Hal Williams in his book on the 1896 election, it was, as it turned out, a brilliant strategy. McKinleys Front Porch Campaign became a legend in American political history. William and Ida McKinley pose with members of the Flower Delegation from Oil City, Pennsylvania, before the McKinley home. Although women could not vote in most states, they might influence male relatives and were encouraged to visit Canton. McKinley made himself available to the public every day except Sunday, receiving delegations from the front porch of his home. The railroads subsidized the visitors with low excursion rates the prosilver Cleveland Plain Dealer disgustedly stated that going to Canton had been made cheaper than staying at home. Delegations marched through the streets from the railroad station to McKinleys home on North Market Street. Once there, they crowded close to the front porch from which they surreptitiously whittled souvenirs as their spokesman addressed McKinley. The candidate then responded, speaking on campaign issues in a speech molded to suit the interest of the delegation. The speeches were carefully scripted to avoid extemporaneous remarks even the spokesmans remarks were approved by McKinley or a representative. This was done as the candidate feared an offhand comment by another that might rebound on him, as had happened to Blaine in 1884. altA political cartoon. A closed fist protrudes from a jacketsleeve covered in dollar signs a cufflink is marked MARK HANNA. The hand tightly grasps a chain from which hangs a tiny, sorrylooking figure marked McKinley. A Man of Mark concludes the cartoons caption. Most Democratic newspapers refused to support Bryan, the major exception being the New York Journal , controlled by William Randolph Hearst, whose fortune was based on silver mines. In biased reporting and through the sharp cartoons of Homer Davenport, Hanna was viciously characterized as a plutocrat, trampling on labor. McKinley was drawn as a child, easily controlled by big business. Even today, these depictions still color the images of Hanna and McKinley one as a heartless businessman, the other as a creature of Hanna and others of his ilk. The Democrats had pamphlets too, though not as many. Jones analyzed how voters responded to the education campaigns of the two parties The battleground proved to be the Midwest the South and most of the West were conceded to Bryan and the Democrat spent much of his time in those crucial states. The Northeast was considered most likely safe for McKinley after the earlyvoting states of Maine and Vermont supported him in September. By then, it was clear that public support for silver had receded, and McKinley began to emphasize the tariff issue. By the end of September, the Republicans had discontinued printing material on the silver issue, and were entirely concentrating on the tariff question. On November 3, 1896, the voters had their say. McKinley won the entire Northeast and Midwest he won 51 of the vote and an ample majority in the Electoral College. Bryan had concentrated entirely on the silver issue, and had not appealed to urban workers. Voters in cities supported McKinley the only city outside the South of more than 100,000 population carried by Bryan was Denver, Colorado. 1896 Electoral vote results The 1896 presidential election is often seen as a realigning election, in which McKinleys view of a stronger central government building American industry through protective tariffs and a dollar based on gold triumphed. The voting patterns established then displaced the neardeadlock the major parties had seen since the Civil War the Republican dominance begun then would continue until 1932, another realigning election with the ascent of Franklin Roosevelt. Phillips argues that, with the possible exception of Iowa Senator Allison, McKinley was the only Republican who could have defeated Bryan he theorized that eastern candidates such as Morton or Reed would have done badly against the Illinoisborn Bryan in the crucial Midwest. According to the biographer, though Bryan was popular among rural voters, McKinley appealed to a very different industrialized, urbanized America. Presidency Inauguration and appointments McKinleys first inauguration in 1897 Chief Justice Melville Fuller swears in William McKinley as president outgoing President Grover Cleveland at right. McKinley was sworn in as president on March 4, 1897, as his wife and mother looked on. The new President gave a lengthy inaugural address he urged tariff reform, and stated that the currency issue would have to await tariff legislation. He warned against foreign interventions, We want no wars of conquest. We must avoid the temptation of territorial aggression. McKinleys most controversial Cabinet appointment was that of John Sherman as Secretary of State. Sherman had an outstanding reputation but old age was fast reducing his abilities. McKinley needed to have Hanna appointed to the Senate so Senator Sherman was moved up. Shermans mental faculties were decaying even in 1896 this was widely spoken of in political circles, but McKinley did not believe the rumors. Nevertheless, McKinley sent his cousin, William McKinley Osborne, to have dinner with the 73yearold senator he reported back that Sherman seemed as lucid as ever. McKinley wrote once the appointment was announced, the stories regarding Senator Shermans mental decay are without foundation... When I saw him last I was convinced both of his perfect health, physically and mentally, and that the prospects of life were remarkably good. Maine Representative Nelson Dingley Jr. was McKinleys choice for Secretary of the Treasury he declined it, preferring to remain as chairman of the Ways and Means Committee. Charles Dawes, who had been Hannas lieutenant in Chicago during the campaign, was considered for the Treasury post but by some accounts Dawes considered himself too young. Dawes eventually became Comptroller of the Currency he recorded in his published diary that he had strongly urged McKinley to appoint as secretary the successful candidate, Lyman J. Gage, president of the First National Bank of Chicago and a Gold Democrat. The Navy Department was offered to former Massachusetts Congressman John Davis Long, an old friend from the House, on January 30, 1897. Although McKinley was initially inclined to allow Long to choose his own assistant, there was considerable pressure on the Presidentelect to appoint Theodore Roosevelt, head of the New York City Police Commission and a published naval historian. McKinley was reluctant, stating to one Roosevelt booster, I want peace and I am told that your friend Theodore is always getting into rows with everybody. Nevertheless, he made the appointment. In addition to Sherman, McKinley made one other illadvised Cabinet appointment, that of Secretary of War, which fell to Russell A. Alger, former general and Michigan governor. Competent enough in peacetime, Alger proved inadequate once the conflict with Spain began. With the War Department plagued by scandal, Alger resigned at McKinleys request in mid1899. Vice President Hobart, as was customary at the time, was not invited to Cabinet meetings. However, he proved a valuable adviser both for McKinley and for his Cabinet members. The wealthy Vice President leased a residence close to the White House the two families visited each other without formality, and the Vice Presidents wife, Jennie Tuttle Hobart, sometimes substituted as Executive Mansion hostess when Ida McKinley was unwell. For most of McKinleys administration, George B. Cortelyou served as his personal secretary. Cortelyou, who served in three Cabinet positions under Theodore Roosevelt, became a combination press secretary and chief of staff to McKinley. Cabinet President McKinley and his cabinet, 1898At far left William McKinley. Left to right in back of table Lyman J. Gage, John W. Griggs, John D. Long, James Wilson standing, and Cornelius N. Bliss. Left to right in front of table John Hay, Russell A. Alger, and Charles E. Smith Cuba crisis and war with Spain Political cartoon of 1898 For decades, rebels in Cuba had waged an intermittent campaign for freedom from Spanish colonial rule. By 1895, the conflict had expanded to a war for Cuban independence. As war engulfed the island, Spanish reprisals against the rebels grew ever harsher. American public opinion favored the rebels, and McKinley shared in their outrage against Spanish policies. However while public opinion called for war to liberate Cuba, McKinley favored a peaceful approach, hoping that through negotiation, Spain might be convinced to grant Cuba independence, or at least to allow the Cubans some measure of autonomy. The United States and Spain began negotiations on the subject in 1897, but it became clear that Spain would never concede Cuban independence, while the rebels would never settle for anything less. In January 1898, Spain promised some concessions to the rebels, but when American consul Fitzhugh Lee reported riots in Havana, McKinley agreed to send the battleship USS Maine there to protect American lives and property. On February 15, the Maine exploded and sank with 266 men killed. Public attention focused on the crisis and the consensus was that regardless of who set the bomb, Spain had lost control over Cuba. McKinley insisted that a court of inquiry first determine whether the explosion was accidental. Negotiations with Spain continued as the court considered the evidence, but on March 20, the court ruled that the Maine was blown up by an underwater mine. As pressure for war mounted in Congress, McKinley continued to negotiate for Cuban independence. Spain refused McKinleys proposals, and on April 11, McKinley turned the matter over to Congress. He did not ask for war, but Congress declared war anyway on April 20, with the addition of the Teller Amendment, which disavowed any intention of annexing Cuba. Editorial cartoon intervention in Cuba. Columbia reaches out to help oppressed Cuba in 1897 while Uncle Sam is blind to the crisis and will not use its powerful guns to help. Judge magazine, February 6, 1897. The expansion of the telegraph and the development of the telephone gave McKinley a greater control over the daytoday management of the war than previous presidents had enjoyed, and he used the new technologies to direct the armys and navys movements as far as he was able. McKinley found Alger inadequate as Secretary of War, and did not get along with the Armys commanding general, Nelson A. Miles. Bypassing them, he looked for strategic advice first from Miless predecessor, General John Schofield, and later from Adjutant General Henry Clarke Corbin. The war led to a change in McKinleys cabinet, as the President accepted Shermans resignation as Secretary of State Day agreed to serve as Secretary until the wars end. Within a fortnight, the navy had its first victory when the Asiatic Squadron, led by Commodore George Dewey, destroyed the Spanish navy at the Battle of Manila Bay in the Philippines. Deweys overwhelming victory expanded the scope of the war from one centered in the Caribbean to one that would determine the fate of all of Spains Pacific colonies. The next month, he increased the number of troops sent to the Philippines and granted the forces commander, Major General Wesley Merritt, the power to set up legal systems and raise taxes necessities for a long occupation. By the time the troops arrived in the Philippines at the end of June 1898, McKinley had decided that Spain would be required to surrender the archipelago to the United States. He professed to be open to all views on the subject however, he believed that as the war progressed, the public would come to demand retention of the islands as a prize of war. Meanwhile, in the Caribbean theater, a large force of regulars and volunteers gathered near Tampa, Florida, for an invasion of Cuba. The army faced difficulties in supplying the rapidly expanding force even before they departed for Cuba, but by June, Corbin had made progress in resolving the problems. After lengthy delays, the army, led by Major General William Rufus Shafter, sailed from Florida on June 20, landing near Santiago de Cuba two days later. Following a skirmish at Las Guasimas on June 24, Shafters army engaged the Spanish forces on July 2 in the Battle of San Juan Hill. In an intense daylong battle, the American force was victorious, although both sides suffered heavy casualties. The next day, the Spanish Caribbean squadron, which had been sheltering in Santiagos harbor, broke for the open sea but was intercepted and destroyed by Rear Admiral William T. Sampsons North Atlantic Squadron in the largest naval battle of the war. Shafter laid siege to the city of Santiago, which surrendered on July 17, placing Cuba under effective American control. McKinley and Miles also ordered an invasion of Puerto Rico, which met little resistance when it landed in July. The distance from Spain and the destruction of the Spanish navy made resupply impossible, and the Spanish government began to look for a way to end the war. Peace and territorial gain Signing of the Treaty of Paris McKinleys cabinet agreed with him that Spain must leave Cuba and Puerto Rico, but they disagreed on the Philippines, with some wishing to annex the entire archipelago and some wishing only to retain a naval base in the area. Although public sentiment seemed to favor annexation of the Philippines, several prominent political leaders including Democrats Bryan, and Cleveland, and the newly formed American AntiImperialist League made their opposition known. McKinley proposed to open negotiations with Spain on the basis of Cuban liberation and Puerto Rican annexation, with the final status of the Philippines subject to further discussion. He stood firmly in that demand even as the military situation on Cuba began to deteriorate when the American army was struck with yellow fever. Spain ultimately agreed to a ceasefire on those terms on August 12, and treaty negotiations began in Paris in September 1898. The talks continued until December 18, when the Treaty of Paris was signed. The United States acquired Puerto Rico and the Philippines as well as the island of Guam, and Spain relinquished its claims to Cuba in exchange, the United States agreed to pay Spain 20 million. McKinley had difficulty convincing the Senate to approve the treaty by the requisite twothirds vote, but his lobbying, and that of Vice President Hobart, eventually saw success, as the Senate voted in favor on February 6, 1899, 57 to 27. Annexation of the Republic of Hawaii in 1898 During the war, McKinley also pursued the annexation of the Republic of Hawaii. The new republic, dominated by business interests, had overthrown the Queen in 1893 when she rejected a limited role for herself. There was strong American support for annexation, and the need for Pacific bases in wartime became clear after the Battle of Manila. McKinley came to office as a supporter of annexation, and lobbied Congress to act, warning that to do nothing would invite a royalist counterrevolution or a Japanese takeover. Foreseeing difficulty in getting twothirds of the Senate to approve a treaty of annexation, McKinley instead supported the effort of Democratic Representative Francis G. Newlands of Nevada to accomplish the result by joint resolution of both houses of Congress. The resulting Newlands Resolution passed both houses by wide margins, and McKinley signed it into law on July 8, 1898. McKinley biographer H. Wayne Morgan notes, McKinley was the guiding spirit behind the annexation of Hawaii, showing... a firmness in pursuing it the President told Cortelyou, We need Hawaii just as much and a good deal more than we did California. It is manifest destiny. Expanding influence overseas Even before peace negotiations began with Spain, McKinley asked Congress to set up a commission to examine trade opportunities in Asia and espoused an Open Door Policy, in which all nations would freely trade with China and none would seek to violate that nations territorial integrity. American soldiers scale the walls of Beijing to relieve the Siege of the International Legations, August 1900 American missionaries were threatened with death when the Boxer Rebellion menaced foreigners in China. Americans and other westerners in Peking were besieged and, in cooperation with other western powers, McKinley ordered 5000 troops to the city in June 1900 in the China Relief Expedition. The westerners were rescued the next month, but several Congressional Democrats objected to McKinley dispatching troops without consulting the legislature. McKinleys actions set a precedent that led to most of his successors exerting similar independent control over the military. After the rebellion ended, the United States reaffirmed its commitment to the Open Door policy, which became the basis of American policy toward China. Closer to home, McKinley and Hay engaged in negotiations with Britain over the possible construction of a canal across Central America. The Clayton Bulwer Treaty, which the two nations signed in 1850, prohibited either from establishing exclusive control over a canal there. The war had exposed the difficulty of maintaining a twoocean navy without a connection closer than Cape Horn. Now, with American business and military interests even more involved in Asia, a canal seemed more essential than ever, and McKinley pressed for a renegotiation of the treaty. Hay and the British ambassador, Julian Pauncefote, agreed that the United States could control a future canal, provided that it was open to all shipping and not fortified. McKinley was satisfied with the terms, but the Senate rejected them, demanding that the United States be allowed to fortify the canal. Hay was embarrassed by the rebuff and offered his resignation, but McKinley refused it and ordered him to continue negotiations to achieve the Senates demands. He was successful, and a new treaty was drafted and approved, but not before McKinleys assassination in 1901. Tariffs and bimetallism 1900 reelection poster celebrates McKinley standing tall on the gold standard with support from soldiers, sailors, businessmen, factory workers and professionals. McKinley had built his reputation in Congress on high tariffs, promising protection for American business and wellpaid American factory workers. With the Republicans in control of Congress, Ways and Means chairman Dingley introduced the Dingley Act which would raise rates on wool, sugar, and luxury goods. McKinley supported it and it became law. American negotiators soon concluded a reciprocity treaty with France, and the two nations approached Britain to gauge British enthusiasm for bimetallism. The Prime Minister, Lord Salisbury, and his government showed some interest in the idea and told the American envoy, Edward O. Wolcott, that he would be amenable to reopening the mints in India to silver coinage if the Viceroys Executive Council there agreed. News of a possible departure from the gold standard stirred up immediate opposition from its partisans, and misgivings by the Indian administration led Britain to reject the proposal. With the international effort a failure, McKinley turned away from silver coinage and embraced the gold standard. Even without the agreement, agitation for free silver eased as prosperity began to return to the United States and gold from recent strikes in the Yukon and Australia increased the monetary supply even without silver coinage. In the absence of international agreement, McKinley favored legislation to formally affirm the gold standard, but was initially deterred by the silver strength in the Senate. By 1900, with another campaign ahead and good economic conditions, McKinley urged Congress to pass such a law, and was able to sign the Gold Standard Act on March 14, 1900, using a gold pen to do so. Civil rights In the wake of McKinleys election in 1896, African Americans were hopeful of progress towards equality. McKinley had spoken out against lynching while governor, and most African Americans who could vote supported him in 1896. McKinleys priority, however, was in ending sectionalism, and they were disappointed by his policies and appointments. Although McKinley made some appointments of African Americans to lowlevel government posts, and received some praise for that, the appointments were less than they had received under previous Republican administrations. Blanche K. Bruce, an African American who during Reconstruction had served as senator from Mississippi, received the post of register at the Treasury Department this post was traditionally given to an African American by Republican presidents. McKinley appointed several black postmasters however, when Democrats protested the appointment of Justin W. Lyons as postmaster of Augusta, Georgia, McKinley asked Lyons to withdraw . The President did appoint George B. Jackson, a former slave, to the post of customs collector in Presidio, Texas. However, African Americans in northern states felt that their contributions to McKinleys victory were overlooked few were appointed to office. The administrations response to racial violence was minimal, causing him to lose black support. When black postmasters at Hogansville, Georgia in 1897, and at Lake City, South Carolina the following year, were assaulted, McKinley issued no statement of condemnation. Although black leaders criticized McKinley for inaction, supporters responded by saying there was little the president could do to intervene. Critics replied by saying that he could at least publicly condemn such events, as Harrison had done. McKinley, flanked by Georgia Governor Allen D. Candler and Gen. William Rufus Shafter, reviewing the Atlanta Peace Jubilee parade, December 15, 1898. According to historian Clarance A. Bacote, Before the Spanish American War, the Negroes, in spite of some mistakes, regarded McKinley as the best friend they ever had. Under pressure from black leaders, McKinley required the War Department to commission black officers above the rank of lieutenant. McKinley toured the South in late 1898, promoting sectional reconciliation. He visited Tuskegee Institute and black educator Booker T. Washington. He also visited Confederate memorials. In his tour of the South, McKinley did not mention the racial tensions or violence. Although the President received a rapturous reception from Southern whites, many African Americans, excluded from official welcoming committees, felt alienated by the Presidents words and actions. Gould concluded regarding race, McKinley lacked the vision to transcend the biases of his day and to point toward a better future for all Americans. 1900 election McKinley ran on his record of prosperity and victory in 1900, winning easy reelection over Bryan. Republicans were generally successful in state and local elections around the country in 1899, and McKinley was optimistic about his chances at reelection in 1900. McKinleys popularity in his first term assured him of renomination for a second. The only question about the Republican ticket concerned the vice presidential nomination McKinley needed a new running mate as Hobart had died in late 1899. McKinley initially favored Elihu Root, who had succeeded Alger as Secretary of War, but McKinley decided that Root was doing too good a job at the War Department to move him. He considered other prominent candidates, including Allison and Cornelius N. Bliss, but none were as popular as the Republican partys rising star, Theodore Roosevelt. After a stint as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Roosevelt had resigned and raised a cavalry regiment they fought bravely in Cuba, and Roosevelt returned home covered in glory. Elected governor of New York on a reform platform in 1898, Roosevelt had his eye on the presidency. Many supporters recommended him to McKinley for the second spot on the ticket, and Roosevelt believed it would be an excellent stepping stone to the presidency in 1904. McKinley remained uncommitted in public, but Hanna was firmly opposed to the New York governor. The Ohio senator considered the New Yorker overly impulsive his stance was undermined by the efforts of political boss and New York Senator Thomas C. Platt, who, disliking Roosevelts reform agenda, sought to sideline the governor by making him vice president. When the Republican convention began in Philadelphia that June, no vice presidential candidate had overwhelming support, but Roosevelt had the broadest range of support from around the country. McKinley affirmed that the choice belonged to the convention, not to him. On June 21, McKinley was unanimously renominated and, with Hannas reluctant acquiescence, Roosevelt was nominated for vice president on the first ballot. The Democratic convention convened the next month in Kansas City and nominated William Jennings Bryan, setting up a rematch of the 1896 contest. The candidates were the same, but the issues of the campaign had shifted free silver was still a question that animated many voters, but the Republicans focused on victory in war and prosperity at home as issues they believed favored their party. Democrats knew the war had been popular, even if the imperialism issue was less sure, so they focused on the issue of trusts and corporate power, painting McKinley as the servant of capital and big business. As in 1896, Bryan embarked on a speaking tour around the country while McKinley stayed at home, this time making only one speech, to accept his nomination. Roosevelt emerged as the campaigns primary speaker and Hanna helped the cause working to settle a coal miners strike in Pennsylvania. Bryans campaigning failed to excite the voters as it had in 1896, and McKinley never doubted that he would be reelected. On November 6, 1900, he was proven correct, winning the largest victory for any Republican since 1872. Bryan carried only four states outside the solid South, and McKinley even won Bryans home state of Nebraska. Second term Soon after his second inauguration on March 4, 1901, William and Ida McKinley undertook a sixweek tour of the nation. Traveling mostly by rail, the McKinleys were to travel through the South to the Southwest, and then up the Pacific coast and east again, to conclude with a visit on June 13, 1901, to the PanAmerican Exposition in Buffalo, New York. However, the First Lady fell ill in California, causing her husband to limit his public events and cancel a series of speeches he had planned to give urging trade reciprocity. He also postponed the visit to the fair until September, planning a month in Washington and two in Canton before the Buffalo visit. Assassination and death throes McKinley entering the Temple of Music on September 6, 1901, shortly before the shots were fired Artists conception of the shooting of McKinley Although McKinley enjoyed meeting the public, Cortelyou was concerned with his security due to recent assassinations by anarchists in Europe, such as the assassination of King Umberto I of Italy the previous year, and twice tried to remove a public reception from the Presidents rescheduled visit to the Exposition. McKinley refused, and Cortelyou arranged for additional security for the trip. On September 5, the President delivered his address at the fairgrounds, before a crowd of some 50,000 people. In his final speech, McKinley urged reciprocity treaties with other nations to assure American manufacturers access to foreign markets. He intended the speech as a keynote to his plans for a second term. One man in the crowd, Leon Czolgosz, hoped to assassinate McKinley. He had managed to get close to the presidential podium, but did not fire, uncertain of hitting his target. Czolgosz, since hearing a speech by anarchist Emma Goldman in Cleveland, had decided to do something he believed would advance the cause. After his failure to get close enough on the fifth, Czolgosz waited the next day at the Temple of Music on the Exposition grounds, where the President was to meet the public. Czolgosz concealed his gun in a handkerchief, and, when he reached the head of the line, shot McKinley twice in the abdomen. McKinley urged his aides to break the news gently to Ida, and to call off the mob that had set on Czolgosz a request that may have saved his assassins life. McKinley was taken to the Exposition aid station, where the doctor was unable to locate the second bullet. Although a primitive Xray machine was being exhibited on the Exposition grounds, it was not used. McKinley was taken to the Milburn House. In the days after the shooting McKinley appeared to improve. Doctors issued increasingly optimistic bulletins. Members of the Cabinet, who had rushed to Buffalo on hearing the news, dispersed Vice President Roosevelt departed on a camping trip to the Adirondacks. Leech wrote, Unknown to the doctors, the gangrene that would kill him was growing on the walls of his stomach, slowly poisoning his blood. On the morning of September 13, McKinley took a turn for the worse. Relatives and friends gathered around the death bed. At 215a.m. on September 14, President McKinley died. Theodore Roosevelt had rushed back and took the oath of office as president in Buffalo. Czolgosz, put on trial for murder nine days after McKinleys death, was found guilty, sentenced to death on September 26, and executed by electric chair on October 29, 1901. Funeral, memorials, and legacy President McKinleys funeral, 1901, part 1 President McKinleys funeral, 1901, part 2 President McKinleys funeral, 1901, part 3 Funeral and resting place According to Gould, The nation experienced a wave of genuine grief at the news of McKinleys passing. The stock market, faced with sudden uncertainty, suffered a steep decline almost unnoticed in the mourning. The nation focused its attention on the casket that made its way by train, first to Washington, where it first lay in the East Room of the Executive Mansion, and then in state in the Capitol, and then was taken to Canton. A hundred thousand people passed by the open casket in the Capitol Rotunda, many having waited hours in the rain in Canton, an equal number did the same at the Stark County Courthouse on September 18. The following day, a funeral service was held at the First Methodist Church the casket was then sealed and taken to the McKinley house, where relatives paid their final respects. It was then transported to the receiving vault at West Lawn Cemetery in Canton, to await the construction of the memorial to McKinley already being planned. There was a widespread expectation that Ida McKinley would not long survive her husband one family friend stated, as William McKinley lay dying, that they should be prepared for a double funeral. This did not occur the former first lady accompanied her husband on the funeral train. Leech noted the circuitous journey was a cruel ordeal for the woman who huddled in a compartment of the funeral train, praying that the Lord would take her with her Dearest Love. She was thought too weak to attend the services in Washington or Canton, although she listened at the door to the service for her husband in her house on North Market Street. She remained in Canton for the remainder of her life, setting up a shrine in her house, and often visiting the receiving vault, until her death at age 59 on May 26, 1907. She died only months before the completion of the large marble monument to her husband in Canton, which was dedicated by President Roosevelt on September 30, 1907. William and Ida McKinley are interred there with their daughters, atop a hillside overlooking the city of Canton. Other memorials In addition to the Canton site there are many memorials to McKinley. There is a monument at his birthplace in Niles 20Ohio schools bear his name. There are several schools in the United States named McKinley School. Nearly a million dollars was pledged by contributors or allocated from public funds for the construction of McKinley memorials in the year after his death. Phillips suggests the significant number of major memorials to McKinley in Ohio reflected the expectation among Ohioans in the years after McKinleys death that he would be ranked among the great presidents. Statues to him may be found in more than a dozen states his name has been bestowed on streets, civic organizations, and libraries. McKinleys name is also used in the large innercity Honolulu, Hawaii high school, President William McKinley High School. In 1896, a gold prospector gave McKinleys name to Denali, the tallest mountain in North America at , in support of the then newly minted Republican nominee for President. The Alaska Board of Geographic Names changed the name of the mountain back to Denali in 1975, which is what it was called by locals. The Department of the Interior followed suit in August 2015 as a part of a visit to Alaska by President Barack Obama. Similarly, Denali National Park was known as Mount McKinley National Park until December 2, 1980, when it was changed by legislation signed by President Jimmy Carter. Legacy and historical image The official Presidential portrait of William McKinley McKinleys biographer, H. Wayne Morgan remarks that McKinley died the most beloved president in history. However, the young, enthusiastic Roosevelt quickly captured public attention after his predecessors death. The new president made little effort to secure the trade reciprocity McKinley had intended to negotiate with other nations. Controversy and public interest surrounded Roosevelt throughout the seven and a half years of his presidency as memories of McKinley faded by 1920, according to Gould, McKinleys administration was deemed no more than a mediocre prelude to the vigor and energy of Theodore Roosevelts. Beginning in the 1950s, McKinley received more favorable evaluations nevertheless, in surveys ranking American presidents, he has generally been placed near the middle, often trailing contemporaries such as Hayes and Cleveland. Morgan suggests that this relatively low ranking is due to a perception among historians that while many decisions during McKinleys presidency profoundly affected the nations future, he more followed public opinion than led it, and that McKinleys standing has suffered from altered public expectations of the presidency. There has been broad agreement among historians that McKinleys election was at the time of a transition between two political eras, dubbed the Third and Fourth Party Systems. Kenneth F. Warren emphasizes the national commitment to a probusiness, industrial, and modernizing program, represented by McKinley. Historian Daniel P. Klinghard argued that McKinleys personal control of the 1896 campaign gave him the opportunity to reshape the presidency rather than simply follow the party platform by representing himself as the voice of the people. Republican Karl Rove exalted McKinley as the model for a sweeping political realignment behind George W. Bush in the 2000s, a realignment that did not happen. Some political scientists, such as David Mayhew, questioned whether the 1896 election truly represented a realignment, thereby placing in issue whether McKinley deserves credit for it. Historian Michael J. Korzi argued in 2005 that while it is tempting to see McKinley as the key figure in the transition from congressional domination of government to the modern, powerful president, this change was an incremental process through the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Phillips writes that McKinleys low rating is undeserved, and that he should be ranked just after the great presidents such as Washington and Lincoln. He pointed to McKinleys success at building an electoral coalition that kept the Republicans mostly in power for a generation. Phillips believes that part of McKinleys legacy is the men he included in his administration, who dominated the Republican Party for a quarter century after his death. These officials included Cortelyou, who served in three Cabinet positions under Roosevelt, and Dawes, who became vice president under Coolidge. Other McKinley appointees who later became major figures include Day, who Roosevelt elevated to the Supreme Court where he remained nearly twenty years, and William Howard Taft, whom McKinley had made GovernorGeneral of the Philippines and who succeeded Roosevelt as president. A controversial aspect of McKinleys presidency is territorial expansion and the question of imperialism with the exception of the Philippines, granted independence in 1946, the United States retains the territories taken under McKinley. The territorial expansion of 1898 is often seen by historians as the beginning of American empire. Morgan sees that historical discussion as a subset of the debate over the rise of America as a world power he expects the debate over McKinleys actions to continue indefinitely without resolution, and notes that however one judges McKinleys actions in American expansion, one of his motivations was to change the lives of Filipinos and Cubans for the better. Morgan alludes to the rise of interest in McKinley as part of the debate over the more assertive American foreign policy of recent decades FileMcKinley Grave.JPGMcKinleys tomb in Canton FileMcKinley Memorial Ohio Statehouse.JPGMcKinley memorial by Hermon MacNeil in front of the Ohio Statehouse, Columbus File500 USD note series of 1934 obverse.jpgMcKinley on the 500 bill FileMcKinley19047.jpgLouisiana Purchase Exposition stamp honoring McKinley, who had signed a bill authorizing a subsidy for that upcoming event FileMcKINLEY, WilliamPresident .jpgBEP engraved portrait of McKinley as President See also List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience McKinley at Home, Canton, Ohio Notes References Bibliography Books Dewey, Davis R. National Problems 1880 1897 Morgan, H. Wayne, From Hayes to McKinley National Party Politics, 1877 1896 Oberholtzer, Ellis Paxson. A History of the United States since the Civil War. Volume V, 1888 1901 . 791 pp. Articles Online External links Official William McKinley Presidential Library and Museum White House biography Speeches Text of a number of McKinley speeches, Miller Center of Public Affairs Media coverage Other William McKinley A Resource Guide, Library of Congress Extensive essays on William McKinley and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs McKinley Assassination Ink, a documentary history of William McKinleys assassination Life Portrait of William McKinley, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , August 23, 1999 William McKinley Personal Manuscripts Category1843 births Category1901 deaths Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury Methodists Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury Methodists CategoryAlbany Law School alumni CategoryAllegheny College alumni CategoryAmerican Methodists CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryAssassinated heads of state CategoryAssassinated Presidents of the United States CategoryDeaths by firearm in New York CategoryDeaths from gangrene CategoryGovernors of Ohio CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryMcKinley family CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Ohio CategoryOhio Republicans CategoryPoliticians from Canton, Ohio CategoryPeople from Niles, Ohio CategoryPeople murdered in New York CategoryPeople of the Spanish American War CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryProgressive Era in the United States CategoryRepublican Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party state governors of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryUnion Army officers CategoryUnited States Army officers CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1892 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1896 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1900 CategoryUniversity of Mount Union alumni CategoryLawyers from Canton, Ohio CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by readinglaw
William Howard Taft served as the 27th President of the United States and as the 10th Chief Justice of the United States , the only person to have held both offices. Taft was elected president in 1908, the chosen successor of Theodore Roosevelt, but was defeated for reelection by Woodrow Wilson in 1912 after Roosevelt split the Republican vote by running as a thirdparty candidate. In 1921, President Warren G. Harding appointed Taft to be chief justice, a position in which he served until a month before his death. Taft was born in Cincinnati in 1857. His father, Alphonso Taft, was a U.S. Attorney General and Secretary of War. William Taft attended Yale and was a member of Skull and Bones secret society like his father, and after becoming a lawyer was appointed a judge while still in his twenties. He continued a rapid rise, being named Solicitor General and as a judge of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. In 1901, President William McKinley appointed Taft civilian governor of the Philippines. In 1904, Roosevelt made him Secretary of War, and he became Roosevelts handpicked successor. Despite his personal ambition to become chief justice, Taft declined repeated offers of appointment to the Supreme Court of the United States, believing his political work to be more important. With Roosevelts help, Taft had little opposition for the Republican nomination for president in 1908, and easily defeated William Jennings Bryan for the presidency that November. In the White House, he focused on East Asia more than European affairs, and repeatedly intervened to prop up or remove Latin American governments. Taft sought reductions to trade tariffs, then a major source of governmental income, but the resulting bill was heavily influenced by special interests. His administration was filled with conflict between the conservative wing of the Republican Party, with which Taft often sympathized, and the progressive wing, toward which Roosevelt moved more and more. Controversies over conservation and over antitrust cases filed by the Taft administration served to further separate the two men. Roosevelt challenged Taft for renomination in 1912. Taft used his control of the party machinery to gain a bare majority of delegates, and Roosevelt bolted the party. The split left Taft with little chance of reelection he took only Utah and Vermont in Wilsons victory. After leaving office, Taft returned to Yale as a professor, continuing his political activity and working against war through the League to Enforce Peace. In 1921, President Harding appointed Taft as chief justice, an office he had long sought. Chief Justice Taft was a conservative on business issues, but under him, there were advances in individual rights. In poor health, he resigned in February 1930. After his death the next month, he was buried at Arlington National Cemetery, the first president and first Supreme Court justice to be interred there. Taft is generally listed near the middle in historians rankings of U.S. presidents. Early life and education Yale College photograph of Taft William Howard Taft was born September 15, 1857 in Cincinnati, Ohio, to Alphonso Taft and Louise Torrey. The Taft family was not wealthy, living in a modest home in the suburb of Mount Auburn. Alphonso served as a judge, ambassador and in the cabinet, as War Secretary and Attorney General under Ulysses S. Grant. William Taft was not seen as brilliant as a child, but was a hard worker Tafts demanding parents pushed him and his four brothers toward success, tolerating nothing less. He attended Woodward High School in Cincinnati. At Yale College, which he entered in 1874, the heavyset, jovial Taft was popular. One classmate described him succeeding through hard work rather than being the smartest, and as having integrity. In 1878, Taft graduated, second in his class out of 121. He attended Cincinnati Law School, and graduated with a Bachelor of Laws in 1880. While in law school, he worked on The Cincinnati Commercial newspaper, edited by Murat Halstead. Taft was assigned to cover the local courts, and also spent time reading law in his fathers office both activities gave him practical knowledge of the law that was not taught in class. Shortly before graduating from law school, Taft went to the state capital of Columbus to take the bar examination and easily passed. Rise in government Ohio lawyer and judge After admission to the Ohio bar, Taft devoted himself to his job at the Commercial fulltime. Halstead was willing to take him on permanently at an increase in salary if he would give up the law, but Taft declined. In October 1880, Taft was appointed assistant prosecutor for Hamilton County , and took office the following January. Taft served for a year as assistant prosecutor, trying his share of routine cases. He resigned in January 1882 after President Chester A. Arthur appointed him Collector of Internal Revenue for Ohios First District, an area centered on Cincinnati. Taft refused to dismiss competent employees who were politically out of favor, and resigned effective in March 1883, writing to Arthur that he wished to begin private practice in Cincinnati. In 1884, Taft campaigned for the Republican candidate for president, Maine Senator James G. Blaine, who lost to New York Governor Grover Cleveland. In 1887, Taft, then aged 29, was appointed to a vacancy on the Superior Court of Cincinnati by Governor Joseph B. Foraker. The appointment was good for just over a year, after which he would have to face the voters, and in April 1888, he sought election for the first of three times in his lifetime, the other two being for the presidency. He was elected to a full fiveyear term. Some two dozen of Tafts opinions as a state judge survive, the most significant being Moores Co. v. Bricklayers Union No. 1 if only because it was used against him when he ran for president in 1908. The case involved bricklayers who refused to work for any firm that dealt with a company called Parker Brothers, with which they were in dispute. Taft ruled that the unions action amounted to a secondary boycott, which was illegal. It is not clear when Taft met Helen Herron , but it was no later than 1880, when she mentioned in her diary receiving an invitation to a party from him. By 1884, they were meeting regularly, and in 1885, after an initial rejection, she agreed to marry him. The wedding took place at the Herron home on June 19, 1886. William Taft remained devoted to his wife throughout their almost 44 years of marriage. Nellie Taft pushed her husband much as his parents had, and she could be very frank with her criticisms. The couple had three children, of which the eldest, Robert, became a U.S. senator. Solicitor General There was a seat vacant on the U.S. Supreme Court in 1889, and Governor Foraker suggested President Harrison appoint Taft to fill it. Taft was 32 and his professional goal was always a seat on the Supreme Court. He actively sought the appointment, writing to Foraker to urge the governor to press his case, while stating to others it was unlikely he would get it. Instead, in 1890, Harrison appointed him Solicitor General of the United States. When Taft arrived in Washington in February 1890, the office had been vacant two months, with the work piling up. He worked to eliminate the backlog, while simultaneously educating himself on federal law and procedure he had not needed as an Ohio state judge. New York Senator William M. Evarts, a former Secretary of State, had been a classmate of Alphonso Taft at Yale. Evarts called to see his friends son as soon as Taft took office, and William and Nellie Taft were launched into Washington society. Nellie Taft was ambitious for herself and her husband, and was annoyed when the people he socialized with most were mainly Supreme Court justices, rather than the arbiters of Washington society such as Theodore Roosevelt, John Hay, Henry Cabot Lodge and their wives. Although Taft was successful as Solicitor General, winning 15 of the 18 cases he argued before the Supreme Court, he was glad when in March 1891, the United States Congress created a new judgeship for each of the United States Courts of Appeal and Harrison appointed him to the Sixth Circuit, based in Cincinnati. In March 1892, Taft resigned as Solicitor General to resume his judicial career. Federal judge Tafts federal judgeship was a lifetime appointment, and one from which promotion to the Supreme Court might come. Tafts older halfbrother Charles, successful in business, supplemented Tafts government salary, allowing William and Nellie Taft and their family to live in comfort. Tafts duties involved hearing trials in the circuit, which included Ohio, Michigan, Kentucky, and Tennessee, and participating with Supreme Court Justice John Marshall Harlan, the circuit justice, and judges of the Sixth Circuit in hearing appeals. Taft spent these years, from 1892 to 1900, in personal and professional contentment. According to historian Louis L. Gould, while Taft shared the fears about social unrest that dominated the middle classes during the 1890s, he was not as conservative as his critics believed. He supported the right of labor to organize and strike, and he ruled against employers in several negligence cases. Among these was Voight v. Baltimore Ohio Southwestern Railway Co. Tafts decision for a worker injured in a railway accident violated the contemporary doctrine of liberty of contract, and he was reversed by the Supreme Court. On the other hand, Tafts opinion in United States v. Addyston Pipe and Steel Co. was upheld unanimously by the high court. Tafts opinion, in which he held that a pipe manufacturers association had violated the Sherman Antitrust Act, was described by Henry Pringle, his biographer, as having definitely and specifically revived that legislation. In 1896, Taft became dean and Professor of Property at his alma mater , the Cincinnati Law School, a post that required him to prepare and give two hourlong lectures each week. He was devoted to his law school, and was deeply committed to legal education, introducing the case system to the curriculum. As a federal judge, Taft could not involve himself with politics, but followed it closely, remaining a Republican supporter. He watched with some disbelief as the campaign of Ohio Governor William McKinley developed in 1894 and 1895, writing I cannot find anybody in Washington who wants him. By March 1896, Taft realized that McKinley would likely be nominated, and was lukewarm in his support. He landed solidly in McKinleys camp after former Nebraska representative William Jennings Bryan in July stampeded the 1896 Democratic National Convention with his Cross of Gold speech. Bryan, both in that address and in his campaign, strongly advocated free silver, a policy that Taft saw as economic radicalism. Taft feared that people would hoard gold in anticipation of a Bryan victory, but he could do nothing but worry. McKinley was elected when a place on the Supreme Court opened in 1898, the only one under McKinley, the president named Joseph McKenna. Philippine years In January 1900, Taft was called to Washington to meet with McKinley. Taft hoped a Supreme Court appointment was in the works, but instead McKinley wanted to place Taft on the commission to organize a civilian government in the Philippines. The appointment would require Tafts resignation from the bench the president assured him that if he fulfilled this task, McKinley would appoint him to the next vacancy on the high court. Taft accepted on condition he was made head of the commission, with responsibility for success or failure McKinley agreed, and Taft sailed for the islands in April 1900. The American takeover meant the Philippine Revolution bled into the Philippine American War, as Filipinos fought for their independence, but U.S. forces, led by military governor General Arthur MacArthur, Jr. had the upper hand by 1900. MacArthur felt the commission was a nuisance, and their mission a quixotic attempt to impose selfgovernment on a people unready for it. The general was forced to cooperate with Taft, as McKinley had given the commission control over the islands military budget. The commission took executive power in the Philippines on September 1, 1900 on July 4, 1901, Taft became civilian governor. MacArthur, until then the military governor, was relieved by General Adna Chaffee, who was designated only as commander of American forces. Taft sought to make the Filipinos partners in a venture that would lead to their selfgovernment he saw independence as something far off. Many Americans in the Philippines viewed the locals as racial inferiors, but Taft wrote soon before his arrival, we propose to banish this idea from their minds. Taft did not impose racial segregation at official events, and treated the Filipinos as social equals. Nellie Taft recalled that neither politics nor race should influence our hospitality in any way. McKinley was assassinated in September 1901, and was succeeded by Theodore Roosevelt. Taft and Roosevelt had first become friends around 1890 while Taft was Solicitor General and Roosevelt a member of the Civil Service Commission. Taft had, after McKinleys election, urged the appointment of Roosevelt as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, and watched as Roosevelt became a war hero, Governor of New York, and Vice President of the United States. They met again when Taft went to Washington in January 1902 to recuperate after two operations caused by an infection. There, Taft testified before the Senate Committee on the Philippines. Taft wanted Filipino farmers to have a stake in the new government through land ownership, but much of the arable land was held by Catholic religious orders of mostly Spanish priests, which were often resented by the Filipinos. Roosevelt had Taft go to Rome to negotiate with Pope Leo XIII, to purchase the lands and to arrange the withdrawal of the Spanish priests, with Americans replacing them and training locals as clergy. Taft did not succeed in resolving these issues on his visit to Rome, but an agreement on both points was made in 1903. In late 1902, Taft had heard from Roosevelt that a seat on the Supreme Court would soon fall vacant on the resignation of Justice George Shiras, and Roosevelt desired that Taft fill it. Although this was Tafts professional goal, he refused as he felt his work as governor was not yet done. One reason for Roosevelts action was his desire to neutralize a potential rival for the presidency Tafts success in the Philippines had not gone unnoticed in the American press. The following year, Roosevelt asked Taft to become Secretary of War. As the War Department was responsible for the Philippines, Taft would remain responsible for the islands, and Root was willing to postpone his departure until 1904, allowing Taft time to wrap up his work in Manila. After consulting with his family, Taft agreed, and sailed for the United States in December 1903. Secretary of War Roosevelt introduces Taft as his crown prince Puck magazine cover, 1906. When Taft took office as Secretary of War in January 1904, he was not called upon to spend much time administering the army, which the president was content to do himself Roosevelt wanted Taft as a troubleshooter in difficult situations, as a legal adviser, and to be able to give campaign speeches as he sought election in his own right. Taft strongly defended Roosevelts record in his addresses, and wrote of the presidents successful but strenuous efforts to gain election, I would not run for president if you guaranteed the office. It is awful to be afraid of ones shadow. Between 1905 and 1907, Taft came to terms with the likelihood he would be the next Republican nominee for president, though he did not plan to actively campaign for it. When Justice Henry B. Brown resigned in 1905, Taft would not accept the seat although Roosevelt offered it, a position Taft held to when another seat opened in 1906. Edith Roosevelt, the First Lady, disliked the growing closeness between the two men, feeling that they were too much alike and that the president did not gain much from the advice of someone who rarely contradicted him. Alternatively, Taft wanted to be chief justice, and kept a close eye on the health of the aging incumbent, Melville Fuller, who turned 75 in 1908. Taft believed Fuller likely to live many years. Roosevelt had indicated he was likely to appoint Taft if the opportunity came to fill the courts center seat, but some considered Attorney General Philander Knox a better candidate. In any event, Fuller remained chief justice throughout Roosevelts presidency. Through the 1903 separation of Panama from Colombia and the HayBunauVarilla Treaty, the United States had secured rights to build a canal in the Isthmus of Panama. Legislation authorizing construction did not specify which government department would be responsible, and Roosevelt designated the Department of War. Taft journeyed to Panama in 1904, viewing the canal site and meeting with Panamanian officials. The Isthmian Canal Commission had trouble keeping a chief engineer, and when in February 1907 John D. Stevens submitted his resignation, Taft recommended an army engineer, George W. Goethals. Under Goethals, the project moved ahead smoothly. Another colony lost by Spain in 1898 was Cuba, but as freedom for Cuba had been a major purpose of the war, it was not annexed by the U.S., but was, after a period of occupation, given independence in 1902. Election fraud and corruption followed, as did factional conflict. In September 1906, President Toms Estrada Palma asked for U.S. intervention. Taft traveled to Cuba with a small American force, and on September 29, 1906, under the terms of the Cuban American Treaty of Relations of 1903, declared himself Provisional Governor of Cuba, a post he held for two weeks before being succeeded by Charles Edward Magoon. In his time in Cuba, Taft worked to persuade Cubans that the U.S. intended stability, not occupation. Taft remained involved in Philippine affairs. During Roosevelts election campaign in 1904, he urged that Philippine agricultural products be admitted to the U.S. without duty. This caused growers of U.S. sugar and tobacco to complain to Roosevelt, who remonstrated with his Secretary of War. Taft expressed unwillingness to change his position, and threatened to resign Roosevelt hastily dropped the matter. Taft returned to the islands in 1905, leading a delegation of congressmen, and again in 1907, to open the first Philippine Assembly. On both of his Philippine trips as Secretary of War, Taft went to Japan, and met with officials there. The meeting in July 1905 came a month before the conference which would end the RussoJapanese War with the Treaty of Portsmouth. Taft met with Japanese Prime Minister Katsura TarM. After that meeting, the two signed a memorandum, with Japan indicating it had no desire to invade the Philippines, and the U.S. that it did not object to Japanese control of Korea. There were U.S. concerns about the number of Japanese laborers coming to the American West Coast, and during Tafts second visit, in September 1907, Tadasu Hayashi, the foreign minister, informally agreed to issue fewer passports to them. Presidential election of 1908 Gaining the nomination Roosevelt had served almost three and a half years of McKinleys term. On the night of his own election in 1904, Roosevelt publicly declared he would not run for reelection in 1908, a pledge he quickly regretted. But he felt bound by his word. Roosevelt believed Taft was his logical successor, although the War Secretary was initially reluctant to run. Roosevelt used his control of the party machinery to aid his heir apparent. On pain of loss of their jobs, political appointees were required to support Taft or remain silent. One of a series of candid photographs known as the Evolution of a Smile, taken just after a formal portrait session, as Taft learns by telephone from Roosevelt of his nomination for president. A number of Republican politicians, such as Treasury Secretary George Cortelyou, tested the waters for a run but chose to stay out. New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes ran, but when he made a major policy speech, Roosevelt the same day sent a special message to Congress warning in strong terms against corporate corruption. The resulting coverage of the presidential message relegated Hughes to the back pages. Roosevelt reluctantly deterred repeated attempts to draft him for another term. Assistant Postmaster General Frank H. Hitchcock resigned from his office in February 1908 to lead the Taft effort. In April, Taft made a speaking tour, traveling as far west as Omaha before being recalled to go to Panama and straighten out a contested election. At the 1908 Republican National Convention in Chicago in June, there was no serious opposition to him, and he gained a firstballot victory. Yet Taft did not have things his own way he had hoped his running mate would be a midwestern progressive like Iowa Senator Jonathan Dolliver, but instead the convention named Congressman James S. Sherman of New York, a conservative. Taft resigned as Secretary of War on June 30 to devote himself fulltime to the campaign. General election campaign Tafts opponent in the general election was Bryan, the Democratic nominee for the third time in four presidential elections. As many of Roosevelts reforms stemmed from proposals by Bryan, the Democrat argued that he was the true heir to Roosevelts mantle. Corporate contributions to federal political campaigns had been outlawed by the 1907 Tillman Act, and Bryan proposed that contributions by officers and directors of corporations be similarly banned, or at least disclosed when made. Taft was only willing to see the contributions disclosed after the election, and tried to ensure that officers and directors of corporations litigating with the government were not among his contributors. 1908 TaftSherman poster Taft began the campaign on the wrong foot, fueling the arguments of those who said he was not his own man by traveling to Roosevelts home at Sagamore Hill for advice on his acceptance speech, saying that he needed the Presidents judgment and criticism. Taft supported most of Roosevelts policies. He argued that labor had a right to organize, but not boycott, and that corporations and the wealthy must also obey the law. Bryan wanted the railroads to be owned by the government, but Taft preferred that they remain in the private sector, with their maximum rates set by the Interstate Commerce Commission, subject to judicial review. Taft attributed blame for the recent recession, the Panic of 1907, to stock speculation and other abuses, and felt some reform of the currency was needed to allow flexibility in the governments response to poor economic times, that specific legislation on trusts was needed to supplement the Sherman Antitrust Act, and that the constitution should be amended to allow for an income tax, thus overruling decisions of the Supreme Court striking such a tax down. Roosevelts expansive use of executive power had been controversial Taft proposed to continue his policies, but place them on more solid legal underpinnings through the passage of legislation. Taft upset some progressives by choosing Hitchcock as Chairman of the Republican National Committee , placing him in charge of the presidential campaign. Hitchcock was quick to bring in men closely allied with big business. Taft took an August vacation in Hot Springs, Virginia, where he irritated political advisors by spending more time on golf than strategy. After seeing a newspaper photo of Taft taking a large swing at a golf ball, Roosevelt warned him against candid shots. 1908 electoral vote results. Roosevelt, frustrated by his own relative inaction, showered Taft with advice, fearing that the electorate would not appreciate Tafts qualities, and that Bryan would win. Roosevelts supporters spread rumors that the president was in effect running Tafts campaign. This annoyed Nellie Taft, who never trusted the Roosevelts. Nevertheless, Roosevelt supported the Republican nominee with such enthusiasm that humorists suggested TAFT stood for Take advice from Theodore. Bryan urged a system of bank guarantees, so that depositors could be repaid if banks failed, but Taft opposed this, offering a postal savings system instead. The issue of prohibition of alcohol entered the campaign when in midSeptember, Carrie Nation called on Taft and demanded to know his views. Taft and Roosevelt had agreed the party platform would take no position on the matter, and Nation left indignant, to allege that Taft was irreligious and against temperance. Taft, at Roosevelts advice, ignored the issue. In the end, Taft won by a comfortable margin. Taft defeated Bryan by 321 electoral votes to 162 however, he garnered just 51.6 percent of the popular vote. Nellie Taft said regarding the campaign, There was nothing to criticize, except his not knowing or caring about the way the game of politics is played. Longtime White House usher Ike Hoover recalled that Taft came often to see Roosevelt during the campaign, but seldom between the election and Inauguration Day, March 4, 1909. Presidency 1909 inauguration Inauguration and appointments Taft was sworn in as president on March 4, 1909. Due to a winter storm that coated Washington with ice, Taft was inaugurated within the Senate Chamber rather than outside the Capitol as is customary. The new president stated in his inaugural address that he had been honored to have been one of the advisers of my distinguished predecessor and to have had a part in the reforms he has initiated. I should be untrue to myself, to my promises, and to the declarations of the party platform on which I was elected if I did not make the maintenance and enforcement of those reforms a most important feature of my administration. He pledged to make those reforms longlasting, ensuring that honest businessmen did not suffer uncertainty through change of policy. He spoke of the need for reduction of the 1897 Dingley Tariff, for antitrust reform, and for continued advancement of the Philippines toward full selfgovernment. Roosevelt left office with regret that his tenure in the position he enjoyed so much was over and, to keep out of Tafts way, arranged for a yearlong hunting trip to Africa. Soon after the Republican convention, Taft and Roosevelt had discussed which cabinet officers would stay on. Taft kept only Agriculture Secretary James Wilson and Postmaster General George von Lengerke Meyer . Others appointed to the Taft cabinet included Philander Knox, who had served under McKinley and Roosevelt as Attorney General, as the new Secretary of State, and Franklin MacVeagh as Treasury Secretary. Taft did not enjoy the easy relationship with the press that Roosevelt had, choosing not to offer himself for interviews or photo opportunities as often as his predecessor had. His administration marked a change in style from the charismatic leadership of Roosevelt to Tafts quieter passion for the rule of law. Tafts first cabinet, 1910 Tafts second cabinet, 1912 Foreign policy Organization and principles Taft made it a priority to restructure the State Department, noting, it is organized on the basis of the needs of the government in 1800 instead of 1900. The Department was for the first time organized into geographical divisions, including desks for the Far East, Latin America and Western Europe. The departments first inservice training program was established, and appointees spent a month in Washington before going to their posts. Taft and Secretary of State Knox had a strong relationship, and the president listened to his counsel on matters foreign and domestic. According to Coletta, however, Knox was not a good diplomat, and had poor relations with the Senate, press, and many foreign leaders, especially those from Latin America. There was broad agreement between Taft and Knox on major foreign policy goals the U.S. would not interfere in European affairs, and would use force if necessary to enforce the Monroe Doctrine in the Americas. The defense of the Panama Canal, which was under construction throughout Tafts term , guided United States foreign policy in the Caribbean and Central America. Previous administrations had made efforts to promote American business interests overseas, but Taft went a step further and used the web of American diplomats and consuls abroad to further trade. Such ties, Taft hoped, would promote world peace. Taft pushed for arbitration treaties with Great Britain and France, but the Senate was not willing to yield its constitutional prerogative to approve treaties to arbitrators. Tariffs and reciprocity Artist William Kendall, Sitter William Howard Taft, Date 1914 At the time of Tafts presidency, protectionism through the use of tariffs was a fundamental position of the Republican Party. The Dingley Tariff had been enacted to protect American industry from foreign competition. The 1908 party platform had supported unspecified revisions to the Dingley Act, and Taft interpreted this to mean reductions. Taft called a special session of Congress to convene on March 15, 1909 to deal with the tariff question. Sereno E. Payne, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, had held hearings in late 1908, and sponsored the resulting draft legislation. On balance, the bill reduced tariffs slightly, but when it passed the House in April 1909 and reached the Senate, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Rhode Island Senator Nelson W. Aldrich, attached many amendments raising rates. This outraged progressives such as Wisconsins Robert M. La Follette, who urged Taft to say that the bill was not in accord with the party platform. Taft refused, angering them. Taft insisted that most imports from the Philippines be free of duty, and according to Anderson, showed effective leadership on a subject he was knowledgeable on and cared about. When opponents sought to modify the tariff bill to allow for an income tax, Taft opposed it on the ground that the Supreme Court would likely strike it down as unconstitutional, as it had before. Instead, they proposed a constitutional amendment, which passed both houses in early July, was sent to the states, and by 1913 was ratified as the Sixteenth Amendment. In the conference committee, Taft won some victories, such as limiting the tax on lumber. The conference report passed both houses, and Taft signed it on August 6, 1909. The PayneAldrich tariff was immediately controversial. According to Coletta, Taft had lost the initiative, and the wounds inflicted in the acrid tariff debate never healed. Newton McConnell cartoon showing Canadian suspicions that Taft and others were only interested in Canada when prosperous. In Tafts annual message sent to Congress in December 1910, he urged a free trade accord with Canada. Britain at that time still handled Canadas foreign relations, and Taft found the British and Canadian governments willing. Many in Canada opposed an accord, fearing the U.S. would dump it when convenient as it had the 1854 ElginMarcy Treaty in 1866, and farm and fisheries interests in the United States were also opposed. After January 1911 talks with Canadian officials, Taft had the agreement, which was not a treaty, introduced into Congress and it passed in late July. The Canadian Parliament, led by Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier, had deadlocked over the issue. Canadians turned Laurier out of office in the September 1911 election and Robert Borden became the new prime minister. No crossborder agreement was concluded, and the debate deepened divisions in the Republican Party. Latin America Taft and Porfirio Daz, Ciudad Jurez, Mexico, 1909 Taft and his Secretary of State, Philander Knox, instituted a policy of Dollar Diplomacy towards Latin America, believing U.S. investment would benefit all involved, while diminishing European influence in regions where the Monroe Doctrine applied. The policy was unpopular among Latin American states that did not wish to become financial protectorates of the United States, as well as in the U.S. Senate, many of whose members believed the U.S. should not interfere abroad. No foreign affairs controversy tested Tafts policy more than the collapse of the Mexican regime and subsequent turmoil of the Mexican Revolution. When Taft entered office, Mexico was increasingly restless under the grip of longtime dictator Porfirio Daz. Many Mexicans backed his opponent, Francisco Madero. There were a number of incidents in which Mexican rebels crossed the U.S. border to obtain horses and weapons Taft sought to prevent this by ordering the US Army to the border areas for maneuvers. Taft told his military aide, Archibald Butt, that I am going to sit on the lid and it will take a great deal to pry me off. He showed his support for Daz by meeting with him at El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Jurez, Mexico, the first meeting between a U.S. and a Mexican president and also the first time an American president visited Mexico. The day of the summit, Frederick Russell Burnham and a Texas Ranger captured and disarmed an assassin holding a palm pistol only a few feet from the two presidents. Before the election in Mexico, Daz jailed opposition candidate Madero, whose supporters took up arms. This resulted in both the ousting of Daz and a revolution that would continue for another ten years. In the U.S.s Arizona Territory, two citizens were killed and almost a dozen injured, some as a result of gunfire across the border. Taft was against an aggressive response and so instructed the territorial governor. Nicaraguas president, Jos Santos Zelaya, wanted to revoke commercial concessions granted to American companies, and American diplomats quietly favored rebel forces under Juan Estrada. Nicaragua was in debt to foreign powers, and the U.S. was unwilling that an alternate canal route fall into the hands of Europeans. Zelayas elected successor, Jos Madriz, could not put down the rebellion as U.S. forces interfered, and in August 1910, the Estrada forces took Managua, the capital. The U.S. compelled Nicaragua to accept a loan, and sent officials to ensure it was repaid from government revenues. The country remained unstable, and after another coup in 1911 and more disturbances in 1912, Taft sent troops to begin the United States occupation of Nicaragua, which lasted until 1933. Treaties among Panama, Colombia, and the United States to resolve disputes arising from the Panamanian Revolution of 1903 had been signed by the lameduck Roosevelt administration in early 1909, and were approved by the Senate and also ratified by Panama. Colombia, however, declined to ratify the treaties, and after the 1912 elections, Knox offered 10 million to the Colombians . The Colombians felt the amount inadequate, and requested arbitration the matter was not settled under the Taft administration. East Asia Due to his years in the Philippines, Taft was keenly interested as president in East Asian affairs. Taft considered relations with Europe relatively unimportant, but because of the potential for trade and investment, Taft ranked the post of minister to China as most important in the Foreign Service. Knox did not agree, and declined a suggestion that he go to Peking to view the facts on the ground. Taft considered Roosevelts minister there, William W. Rockhill, as uninterested in the China trade, and replaced him with William J. Calhoun, whom McKinley and Roosevelt had sent on several foreign missions. Knox did not listen to Calhoun on policy, and there were often conflicts. Taft and Knox tried unsuccessfully to extend John Hays Open Door Policy to Manchuria. In 1898, an American company had gained a concession for a railroad between Hankow and Szechuan, but the Chinese revoked the agreement in 1904 after the company breached the agreement by selling a majority stake outside the United States. The Chinese imperial government got the money for the indemnity from the British Hong Kong government, on condition British subjects would be favored if foreign capital was needed to build the railroad line, and in 1909, a Britishled consortium began negotiations. This came to Knoxs attention in May of that year, and he demanded that U.S. banks be allowed to participate. Taft appealed personally to the Prince Regent, Zaifeng, Prince Chun, and was successful in gaining U.S. participation, though agreements were not signed until May 1911. However, the Chinese decree authorizing the agreement also required the nationalization of local railroad companies in the affected provinces. Inadequate compensation was paid to the shareholders, and these grievances were among those which touched off the Chinese Revolution of 1911. After the revolution broke out, the revolts leaders chose Sun Yat Sen as provisional president of what became the Republic of China, overthrowing the Manchu Dynasty, Taft was reluctant to recognize the new government, although American public opinion was in favor of it. The U.S. House of Representatives in February 1912 passed a resolution supporting a Chinese republic, but Taft and Knox felt recognition should come as a concerted action by Western powers. Taft in his final annual message to Congress in December 1912 indicated that he was moving towards recognition once the republic was fully established, but by then he had been defeated for reelection and he did not follow through. Taft continued the policy against immigration from China and Japan as under Roosevelt. A revised treaty of friendship and navigation entered into by the U.S. and Japan in 1911 granted broad reciprocal rights to Japanese people in America and Americans in Japan, but were premised on the continuation of the Gentlemens Agreement. There was objection on the West Coast when the treaty was submitted to the Senate, but Taft informed politicians that there was no change in immigration policy. Europe Taft was opposed to the traditional practice of rewarding wealthy supporters with key ambassadorial posts, preferring that diplomats not live in a lavish lifestyle and selecting men who, as Taft put it, would recognize an American when they saw one. High on his list for dismissal was the ambassador to France, Henry White, whom Taft knew and disliked from his visits to Europe. Whites ousting caused other career State Department employees to fear that their jobs might be lost to politics. Taft also wanted to replace the Rooseveltappointed ambassador in London, Whitelaw Reid, but Reid, owner of the NewYork Tribune , had backed Taft during the campaign, and both William and Nellie Taft enjoyed his gossipy reports. Reid remained in place until his 1912 death. Taft was a supporter of settling international disputes by arbitration, and he negotiated treaties with Great Britain and with France providing that differences be arbitrated. These were signed in August 1911. Neither Taft nor Knox consulted with members of the Senate during the negotiating process. By then many Republicans were opposed to Taft and the president felt that lobbying too hard for the treaties might cause their defeat. He made some speeches supporting the treaties in October, but the Senate added amendments Taft could not accept, killing the agreements. Although no general arbitration treaty was entered into, Tafts administration settled several disputes with Great Britain by peaceful means, often involving arbitration. These included a settlement of the boundary between Maine and New Brunswick, a longrunning dispute over seal hunting in the Bering Sea that also involved Japan, and a similar disagreement regarding fishing off Newfoundland. The sealing convention remained in force until abrogated by Japan in 1940. Domestic policies and politics Official White House portrait of Taft by Anders Zorn Antitrust Taft continued and expanded Roosevelts efforts to break up business combinations through lawsuits brought under the Sherman Antitrust Act, bringing 70 cases in four years . Suits brought against the Standard Oil Company and the American Tobacco Company, initiated under Roosevelt, were decided in favor of the government by the Supreme Court in 1911. In June 1911, the Democratcontrolled House of Representatives began hearings into United States Steel . That company had been expanded under Roosevelt, who had supported its acquisition of the Tennessee Coal, Iron, and Railroad Company as a means of preventing the deepening of the Panic of 1907, a decision the former president defended when testifying at the hearings. Taft, as Secretary of War, had praised the acquisitions. Historian Louis L. Gould suggested that Roosevelt was likely deceived into believing that U.S. Steel did not want to purchase the Tennessee company, but it was in fact a bargain. For Roosevelt, questioning the matter went to his personal honesty. In October 1911, Tafts Justice Department brought suit against U.S. Steel, demanding that over a hundred of its subsidiaries be granted corporate independence, and naming as defendants many prominent business executives and financiers. The pleadings in the case had not been reviewed by Taft, and alleged that Roosevelt had fostered monopoly, and had been duped by clever industrialists. Roosevelt was offended by the references to him and his administration in the pleadings, and felt that Taft could not evade command responsibility by saying he did not know of them. Taft sent a special message to Congress on the need for a revamped antitrust statute when it convened its regular session in December 1911, but it took no action. Another antitrust case that had political repercussions for Taft was that brought against the International Harvester Company, the large manufacturer of farm equipment, in early 1912. As Roosevelts administration had investigated International Harvester, but had taken no action , the suit became caught up in Roosevelts challenge for the Republican presidential nomination. Supporters of Taft alleged that Roosevelt had acted improperly the former president blasted Taft for waiting three and a half years, and until he was under challenge, to reverse a decision he had supported. Ballinger Pinchot affair Roosevelt was an ardent conservationist, assisted in this by likeminded appointees, including Interior Secretary James R. Garfield and Chief Forester Gifford Pinchot. Taft agreed with the need for conservation, but felt it should be accomplished by legislation rather than executive order. He did not retain Garfield, an Ohioan, as secretary, choosing instead a westerner, former Seattle mayor Richard A. Ballinger. Roosevelt was surprised at the replacement, believing that Taft had promised to keep Garfield, and this change was one of the events that caused Roosevelt to realize that Taft would choose different policies. Roosevelt had withdrawn much land from the public domain, including some in Alaska thought rich in coal. In 1902, Clarence Cunningham, an Idaho entrepreneur, had found coal deposits in Alaska, and made mining claims, and the government investigated their legality. This dragged on for the remainder of the Roosevelt administration, including during the year when Ballinger served as head of the General Land Office. A special agent for the Land Office, Louis Glavis, investigated the Cunningham claims, and when Secretary Ballinger in 1909 approved them, Glavis broke governmental protocol by going outside the Interior Department to seek help from Pinchot. In September 1909, Glavis made his allegations public in a magazine article, disclosing that Ballinger had acted as an attorney for Cunningham between his two periods of government service. This violated conflict of interest rules forbidding a former government official from advocacy on a matter he had been responsible for. On September 13, 1909 Taft dismissed Glavis from government service, relying on a report from Attorney General George W. Wickersham dated two days previously. Pinchot was determined to dramatize the issue by forcing his own dismissal, which Taft tried to avoid, fearing that it might cause a break with Roosevelt . Taft asked Elihu Root to look into the matter, and Root urged the firing of Pinchot. Taft had ordered government officials not to comment on the fracas. In January 1910, Pinchot forced the issue by sending a letter to Iowa Senator Dolliver alleging that but for the actions of the Forestry Service, Taft would have approved a fraudulent claim on public lands. According to Pringle, this was an utterly improper appeal from an executive subordinate to the legislative branch of the government and an unhappy president prepared to separate Pinchot from public office. Pinchot was dismissed, much to his delight, and he sailed for Europe to lay his case before Roosevelt. A congressional investigation followed, which cleared Ballinger by majority vote, but the administration was embarrassed when Glavis attorney, Louis D. Brandeis, proved that the Wickersham report had been backdated, which Taft belatedly admitted. The Ballinger Pinchot affair caused progressives and Roosevelt loyalists to feel that Taft had turned his back on Roosevelts agenda. Civil rights Taft announced in his inaugural address that he would not appoint African Americans to federal jobs, such as postmaster, where this would cause racial friction. This differed from Roosevelt, who would not remove or replace black officeholders with whom local whites would not deal. Termed Tafts Southern Policy, this stance effectively invited white protests against black appointees. Taft followed through, removing most black office holders in the South, and made few appointments from that race in the North. At the time Taft was inaugurated, the way forward for African Americans was debated by their leaders. Booker T. Washington felt that most blacks should be trained for industrial work, with only a few seeking higher education W.E.B. DuBois took a more militant stand for equality. Taft tended towards Washingtons approach. According to Coletta, Taft let the AfricanAmerican be kept in his place... He thus failed to see or follow the humanitarian mission historically associated with the Republican party, with the result that Negroes both North and South began to drift toward the Democratic party. A supporter of free immigration, Taft vetoed a bill passed by Congress and supported by labor unions that would have restricted unskilled laborers by imposing a literacy test. Judicial appointments Taft promoted Associate Justice Edward Douglass White to be Chief Justice of the United States. Taft made six appointments to the Supreme Court, the most of any president except George Washington and Franklin D. Roosevelt. The death of Justice Rufus Peckham in October 1909 gave Taft his first opportunity. He chose an old friend and colleague from the Sixth Circuit, Horace H. Lurton of Georgia he had in vain urged Theodore Roosevelt to appoint Lurton to the high court. Attorney General Wickersham objected that Lurton, a former Confederate soldier and a Democrat, was aged 65. Taft named Lurton anyway on December 13, 1909, and the Senate confirmed him by voice vote a week later. Lurton is still the oldest person to be made an associate justice. Lurie suggested that Taft, already beset by the tariff and conservation controversies, desired to perform an official act which gave him pleasure, especially since he thought Lurton deserved it. Justice David Josiah Brewers death on March 28, 1910 gave Taft a second opportunity to fill a seat on the high court he chose New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes. Taft told Hughes that should the chief justiceship fall vacant during his term, Hughes would be his likely choice for the center seat. The Senate quickly confirmed Hughes, but then Chief Justice Fuller died on July 4, 1910. Taft took five months to replace Fuller, and when he did, it was with Justice Edward Douglass White, who became the first associate justice to be promoted to chief justice. According to Lurie, Taft, who still had hopes of being chief justice, may have been more willing to appoint an older man than he than a younger one , who might outlive him, as indeed Hughes did. To fill Whites seat as associate justice, Taft appointed Willis Van Devanter of Wyoming, a federal appeals judge. By the time Taft nominated White and Van Devanter in December 1910, he had another seat to fill due to William Henry Moodys retirement because of illness he named a Louisiana Democrat, Joseph R. Lamar, whom he had met while playing golf, and had subsequently learned had a good reputation as a judge. With the death of Justice Harlan in October 1911, Taft got to fill a sixth seat on the Supreme Court. After Secretary Knox declined appointment, Taft named Chancellor of New Jersey Mahlon Pitney, the last person appointed to the Supreme Court who did not attend law school. Pitney had a stronger antilabor record than Tafts other appointments, and was the only one to meet opposition, winning confirmation by a Senate vote of 50 26. Taft appointed 13 judges to the federal courts of appeal and 38 to the United States district courts. Taft also appointed judges to various specialized courts, including the first five appointees each to the United States Commerce Court and the United States Court of Customs Appeals. searches run from page, select research categories then check court type and nominating president, then select the court type and also William H. Taft. The Commerce Court, created in 1910, stemmed from a Taft proposal for a specialized court to hear appeals from the Interstate Commerce Commission. There was considerable opposition to its establishment, which only grew when one of its judges, Robert W. Archbald, was in 1912 impeached for corruption and removed by the Senate the following January. Taft vetoed a bill to abolish the court, but the respite was shortlived as Wilson signed similar legislation in October 1913. 1912 presidential campaign and election Moving apart from Roosevelt 1909 Puck magazine cover Roosevelt departs, entrusting his policies to Taft During Roosevelts fifteen months beyond the Atlantic, from March 1909 to June 1910, neither man wrote much to the other. Taft biographer Lurie suggested that each expected the other to make the first move to reestablish their relationship on a new footing. Upon Roosevelts triumphant return, Taft invited him to stay at the White House. The former president declined, and in private letters to friends expressed dissatisfaction at Tafts performance. Nevertheless, he wrote that he expected Taft to be renominated by the Republicans in 1912, and did not speak of himself as a candidate. Taft and Roosevelt met twice in 1910 the meetings, though outwardly cordial, did not display their former closeness. Roosevelt gave a series of speeches in the West in the late summer and early fall of 1910. Roosevelt not only attacked the Supreme Courts 1905 decision in Lochner v. New York , he accused the federal courts of undermining democracy, and called for them to be deprived of the power to rule legislation unconstitutional. This attack horrified Taft, who privately agreed that Lochner had been wrongly decided. Roosevelt called for elimination of corporate expenditures for political purposes, physical valuation of railroad properties, regulation of industrial combinations, establishment of an export tariff commission, a graduated income tax as well as workmens compensation laws, state and national legislation to regulate the labor of women and children, and complete publicity of campaign expenditure. According to John Murphy in his journal article on the breach between the two presidents, As Roosevelt began to move to the left, Taft veered to the right. During the 1910 midterm election campaign, Roosevelt involved himself in New York politics, while Taft with donations and influence tried to secure the election of the Republican gubernatorial candidate in Ohio, former lieutenant governor Warren G. Harding. The Republicans suffered losses in the 1910 elections as the Democrats took control of the House and slashed the Republican majority in the Senate. In New Jersey, Democrat Woodrow Wilson was elected governor, and Harding lost his race in Ohio. After the election, Roosevelt continued to promote progressive ideals, a New Nationalism, much to Tafts dismay. Roosevelt attacked his successors administration, arguing that its guiding principles were not that of the party of Lincoln, but those of the Gilded Age. The feud continued on and off through 1911, a year in which there were few elections of significance. Wisconsin Senator La Follette announced a presidential run as a Republican, and was backed by a convention of progressives. Roosevelt began to move into a position for a run in late 1911, writing that the tradition that presidents not run for a third term only applied to consecutive terms. Roosevelt was receiving many letters from supporters urging him to run, and Republican officeholders were organizing on his behalf. Balked on many policies by an unwilling Congress and courts in his full term in the White House, he saw manifestations of public support he believed would sweep him to the White House with a mandate for progressive policies that would brook no opposition. In February, Roosevelt announced he would accept the Republican nomination if it was offered to him. Taft felt that if he lost in November, it would be a repudiation of the party, but if he lost renomination, it would be a rejection of himself. He was reluctant to oppose Roosevelt, who helped make him president, but having become president, he was determined to be president, and that meant not standing aside to allow Roosevelt to gain another term. Primaries and convention Taft with Archibald Butt As Roosevelt became more radical in his progressivism, Taft was hardened in his resolve to achieve renomination, as he was convinced that the progressives threatened the very foundation of the government. One blow to Taft was the loss of Archibald Butt, one of the last links between the previous and present presidents, as Butt had formerly served Roosevelt. Ambivalent between his loyalties, Butt went to Europe on vacation in early 1912. He sailed for home in April on the Titanic and died in its sinking, a death Taft found hard to accept as his body was not recovered. Taft and Roosevelt political enemies in 1912 Roosevelt dominated the primaries, winning 278 of the 362 delegates to the Republican National Convention in Chicago decided in that manner. Taft had control of the party machinery, and it came as no surprise that he gained the bulk of the delegates decided at district or state conventions. Taft did not have a majority, but was likely to have one once southern delegations committed to him. Roosevelt challenged the election of these delegates, but the RNC overruled most objections. Roosevelts sole remaining chance was with a friendly convention chairman, who might make rulings on the seating of delegates that favored his side. Taft followed custom and remained in Washington, but Roosevelt went to Chicago to run his campaign and told his supporters in a speech, we stand at Armageddon, and we battle for the Lord. Taft had won over Root, who agreed to run for temporary chairman of the convention, and the delegates elected Root over Roosevelts candidate. The Roosevelt forces moved to substitute the delegates they supported for the ones they argued should not be seated. Root made a crucial ruling, that although the contested delegates could not vote on their own seating, they could vote on the other contested delegates, a ruling that assured Tafts nomination, as the motion offered by the Roosevelt forces failed, 567 507. As it became clear Roosevelt would bolt the party if not nominated, some Republicans sought a compromise candidate to avert the electoral disaster to come they were unsuccessful. Tafts name was placed in nomination by Warren Harding, whose attempts to praise Taft and unify the party were met with angry interruptions from progressives. Taft was nominated on the first ballot, though most Roosevelt delegates refused to vote. Campaign and defeat Campaign advertisement arguing Taft deserved a second term Alleging Taft had stolen the nomination, Roosevelt and his followers formed the Progressive Party. Taft knew he would almost certainly be defeated, but concluded that through Roosevelts loss at Chicago the party had been preserved as the defender of conservative government and conservative institutions. He made his doomed run to preserve the Republican Party. Governor Woodrow Wilson was the Democratic nominee. Seeing Roosevelt as the greater electoral threat, Wilson spent little time attacking Taft, arguing that Roosevelt had been lukewarm in opposing the trusts during his presidency, and that Wilson was the true reformer. Taft contrasted what he called his progressive conservatism with Roosevelt s Progressive democracy, which to Taft represented the establishment of a benevolent despotism. Reverting to the preRoosevelt custom that presidents seeking reelection did not campaign, Taft spoke publicly only once, making his nomination acceptance speech on August 1. He had difficulty in financing the campaign, as many industrialists had concluded he could not win, and would support Wilson to block Roosevelt. The president issued a confident statement in September after the Republicans narrowly won Vermonts state elections in a threeway fight, but had no illusions he would win his race. He had hoped to send his cabinet officers out on the campaign trail, but found them reluctant to go. Senator Root agreed to give a single speech for him. Electoral vote by state, 1912. States won by Taft are in red. Vice President Sherman had been renominated at Chicago seriously ill during the campaign, he died six days before the election, and was replaced on the ticket by the president of Columbia University, Nicholas Murray Butler. But few electors chose Taft and Butler, who won only Utah and Vermont, for a total of eight electoral votes. Roosevelt won 88, and Wilson 435. Wilson won though he had only a plurality of the popular vote and less of it than Taft and Roosevelt combined. Taft had hoped to better Roosevelt in the popular vote, but finished with just under 3.5 million, over 600,000 less than the former president. Taft was not on the ballot in California, due to the actions of local Progressives, nor in South Dakota. Return to Yale With no pension or other compensation to expect from the government after leaving the White House, Taft contemplated a return to the practice of law, from which he had long been absent. Given that Taft had appointed many federal judges, including a majority of the Supreme Court, this would raise questions of conflict of interest at every federal court appearance and he was saved from this by an offer for him to become Kent Professor of Law and Legal History at Yale Law School. He accepted, and after a months vacation in Georgia, arrived in New Haven on April 1, 1913 to a rapturous reception. As it was too late in the semester for him to give an academic course, he instead prepared eight lectures on Questions of Modern Government, which he delivered in May. He earned money with paid speeches and with articles for magazines, and would end his eight years out of office having increased his savings. While at Yale, he wrote the treatise, Our Chief Magistrate and His Powers . Taft with President Warren G. Harding and Robert Lincoln at the dedication of the Lincoln Memorial, May 30, 1922 Taft had been made president of the Lincoln Memorial Commission while still in office when Democrats proposed removing him for one of their party, he quipped that unlike losing the presidency, such a removal would hurt. The architect, Henry Bacon, wanted to use ColoradoYule marble, while southern Democrats urged using Georgia marble. Taft lobbied for the western stone, and the matter was submitted to the Commission of Fine Arts, which supported Taft and Bacon. The project went forward Taft would dedicate the Lincoln Memorial as chief justice in 1922. In 1913, Taft was elected to a oneyear term as president of the American Bar Association , a trade group of lawyers. He removed opponents, such as Louis Brandeis and University of Pennsylvania Law School dean William Draper Lewis from committees. Taft maintained a cordial relationship with Wilson. The former president privately criticized his successor on a number of issues, but made his views known publicly only on Philippine policy. Taft was appalled when, after Justice Lamars death in January 1916, Wilson nominated Brandeis, whom the former president had never forgiven for his role in the Ballinger Pinchot affair. When hearings led to nothing discreditable about Brandeis, Taft intervened with a letter signed by himself and other former ABA presidents, stating that Brandeis was not fit to serve on the Supreme Court. Nevertheless, the Democraticcontrolled Senate confirmed Brandeis. Taft and Roosevelt remained embittered they met only once in the first three years of the Wilson presidency, at a funeral at Yale. They spoke only for a moment, politely but formally. As president of the League to Enforce Peace, Taft hoped to prevent war through an international association of nations. With World War I raging in Europe, Taft sent Wilson a note of support for his foreign policy in 1915. President Wilson accepted Tafts invitation to address the league, and spoke in May 1916 of a postwar international organization that could prevent a repetition. Taft supported the effort to get Justice Hughes to resign from the bench and accept the Republican presidential nomination. Once this was done, Hughes tried to get Roosevelt and Taft to reconcile, as a united effort was needed to defeat Wilson. This occurred on October 3 in New York, but Roosevelt allowed only a handshake, and no words were exchanged. This was one of many difficulties for the Republicans in the campaign, and Wilson narrowly won reelection. When Wilson asked Congress to declare war on Germany in April 1917, Taft was an enthusiastic supporter Taft was chairman of the American Red Cross executive committee, occupying much of the former presidents time. He took leave from Yale to be cochairman of the National War Labor Board, tasked with assuring industrial peace. In February 1918, the new RNC chairman, Will H. Hays, approached Taft seeking his reconciliation with Roosevelt. In May, Taft was in Chicago at the Blackstone Hotel, and when he heard that Roosevelt and his party were dining there, walked in on them. The two men embraced to the applause of the room, but the renewed relationship did not progress past outward friendliness before Roosevelts death in January 1919. Taft later wrote, Had he died in a hostile state of mind toward me, I would have mourned the fact all my life. I loved him always and cherish his memory. When Wilson proposed establishment of a League of Nations, with the Leagues charter part of the Treaty of Versailles, Taft expressed public support. He was out of step with his party, whose senators were not inclined to ratify the treaty. Tafts subsequent flipflop on the issue of whether reservations to the treaty were necessary angered both sides, destroying any remaining influence he had with the Wilson administration, and causing some Republicans to call him a Wilson supporter and a traitor to his party. The Senate refused to ratify the Versailles pact. Chief Justice Appointment Chief Justice Taft, ca. 1921 During the 1920 election campaign, Taft supported the Republican ticket, Harding and Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge they were elected. Taft was among those asked to come to the presidentelects home in Marion, Ohio to advise him on appointments, and the two men conferred there on December 24, 1920. By Tafts later account, after some conversation, Harding casually asked if Taft would accept appointment to the Supreme Court, for if Taft would, Harding would put him there. Taft had a condition for Harding that having been president, and having appointed two of the present associate justices and opposed Brandeis, he could only accept the chief justiceship. Harding made no response, and Taft in a thankyou note reiterated the condition and stated that Chief Justice White had often told him he was keeping the position for Taft until a Republican held the White House. In January 1921, Taft heard through intermediaries that Harding planned to appoint him, if given the chance. White by then was in failing health, but made no move to resign when Harding was sworn in on March 4, 1921. Taft called on the chief justice on March 26, and found White ill, but still carrying on his work and not talking of retiring. White did not retire, dying in office on May 19, 1921. Taft issued a tribute to the man he had appointed to the center seat, and waited and worried if he would be Whites successor. Despite widespread speculation Taft would be the pick, Harding made no quick announcement. Taft was lobbying for himself behind the scenes, especially with the Ohio politicians who formed Hardings inner circle. It later emerged that Harding had also promised former Utah senator George Sutherland a seat on the Supreme Court, and was waiting in the expectation that another place would become vacant. Harding was also considering a proposal by Justice William R. Day to crown his career by being chief justice for six months before retiring. Taft felt, when he learned of this plan, that a shortterm appointment would not serve the office well, and that once confirmed by the Senate, the memory of Day would grow dim. After Harding rejected Days plan, Attorney General Harry Daugherty, who supported Tafts candidacy, urged him to fill the vacancy, and he named Taft on June 30, 1921. The Senate confirmed Taft the same day, 61 4, without any committee hearings and after a brief debate in executive session. Taft drew the objections of three progressive Republicans and one southern Democrat. When he was sworn in on July 11, he became the first and to date only person to serve both as president and chief justice. Taft Court membership timeline DateFormat yyyy ImageSize width1000 heightauto barincrement30 Period from1921 till1930 TimeAxis orientationhorizontal PlotArea right20 left0 bottom50 top5 to display a count on left side of graph, use left20 to suppress the count, use left20 Colors idbarcolor valuergb idline valueblack idbg valuewhite idWM valuergb McKinley appointee idTR valuergb Theodore Roosevelt idWHT valuergb William Howard Taft idWW valuergb Woodrow Wilson idWH valuergb Warren Harding idCC valuergb Calvin Coolidge PlotData width15 textcolorblack shift anchorfrom fontsizem bar1 colorWH from1921 till1930 textWilliam Howard Taft bar2 colorWM from1921 till1925 textJoseph McKenna bar3 colorTR from1921 till1930 textOliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. bar4 colorTR from1921 till1922 textWilliam R. Day bar5 colorWHT from1921 till1930 textWillis Van Devanter bar6 colorWHT from1921 till1922 textMahlon Pitney bar7 colorWW from1921 till1930 textJames Clark McReynolds bar8 colorWW from1921 till1930 textLouis Brandeis bar9 colorWW from1921 till1922 textJohn Clarke bar10 colorWH from1922 till1930 textGeorge Sutherland bar11 colorWH from1923 till1930 textPierce Butler bar12 colorWH from1923 till1930 textEdward Terry Sanford bar13 colorCC from1925 till1930 textHarlan F. Stone ScaleMajor gridcolorline unityear increment3 start1921 TextData fontsizeL textcolorblack pos tabs textTaft Court membership Jurisprudence Commerce Clause The Supreme Court, under Taft, compiled a conservative record in Commerce Clause jurisprudence. This had the practical effect of making it difficult for the federal government to regulate industry, and the Taft Court also scuttled many state laws. The few liberals on the court Brandeis, Holmes, and Harlan Fiske Stone sometimes protested, believing orderly progress essential, but often joined in the majority opinion. The White Court had, in 1918, struck down an attempt by Congress to regulate child labor in Hammer v. Dagenhart . Congress thereafter attempted to end child labor by imposing a tax on certain corporations making use of it. That law was overturned by the Supreme Court in 1922 in Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co. , with Taft writing the courts opinion for an 8 1 majority. He held that the tax was not intended to raise revenue, but rather was an attempt to regulate matters reserved to the states under the Tenth Amendment, and that allowing such taxation would eliminate the power of the states. One case in which Taft and his court upheld federal regulation was Stafford v. Wallace . Taft ruled for a 7 1 majority that the processing of animals in stockyards was so closely tied to interstate commerce as to bring it within the ambit of Congresss power to regulate. A case in which the Taft Court struck down regulation that generated a dissent from the chief justice was Adkins v. Childrens Hospital . Congress had decreed a minimum wage for women in the District of Columbia. A 5 3 majority of the Supreme Court struck it down. Justice Sutherland wrote for the majority that the recently ratified Nineteenth Amendment, guaranteeing women the vote, meant that the sexes were equal when it came to bargaining power over working conditions Taft, in dissent, deemed this unrealistic. Tafts dissent in Adkins was rare both because he authored few dissents, and because it was one of the few times he took an expansive view of the police power of the government. Powers of government In 1922, Taft ruled for a unanimous court in Balzac v. Porto Rico . One of the Insular Cases, Balzac involved a Puerto Rico newspaper publisher who was prosecuted for libel but denied a jury trial, a Sixth Amendment protection under the constitution. Taft held that as Puerto Rico was not a territory designated for statehood, only such constitutional protections as Congress decreed would apply to its residents. The U.S. Supreme Court in 1925. Taft is seated in the bottom row, middle. In 1926, Taft wrote for a 6 3 majority in Myers v. United States that Congress could not require the president to get Senate approval before removing an appointee. Taft noted that there is no restriction of the presidents power to remove officials in the constitution. Although Myers involved the removal of a postmaster, Taft in his opinion found invalid the repealed Tenure of Office Act, for violation of which his presidential predecessor, Andrew Johnson, had been impeached, though acquitted by the Senate. Myers , 272 U.S. at 166, 176 Taft valued Myers as his most important opinion. The following year, the court decided McGrain v. Daugherty . A congressional committee investigating possible complicity of former Attorney General Daugherty in the Teapot Dome scandal subpoenaed records from his brother, Mally, who refused to provide them, alleging Congress had no power to obtain documents from him. Van Devanter ruled for a unanimous court against him, finding that Congress had the authority to conduct investigations as an auxiliary to its legislative function. Individual rights In 1925, the Taft Court laid the groundwork for the incorporation of many of the guarantees of the Bill of Rights to be applied against the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. In Gitlow v. New York , the court by a 6 2 vote with Taft in the majority, upheld Gitlows conviction on criminal anarchy charges for advocating the overthrow of the government his defense was freedom of speech. Justice Edward T. Sanford wrote the courts opinion, and both majority and minority assumed that the First Amendments Free Speech and Free Press clauses were protected against infringement by the states. Pierce v. Society of Sisters was a 1925 decision by the Taft Court striking down an Oregon law banning private schools. In a decision written by Justice James C. McReynolds, a unanimous court held that Oregon could regulate private schools, but could not eliminate them. The outcome supported the right of parents to control the education of their children, but also, since the lead plaintiff ran Catholic schools, struck a blow for religious freedom. United States v. Lanza was one of a series of cases involving Prohibition. Lanza committed acts allegedly in violation of both state and federal law, and was first convicted in Washington state court, then prosecuted in federal district court. He alleged the second prosecution in violation of the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment. Taft, for a unanimous court, allowed the second prosecution, holding that the state and federal governments were dual sovereigns, each empowered to prosecute the conduct in question. Administration and political influence Taft exercised the power of his position to influence the decisions of his colleagues, urging unanimity and discouraging dissents. Alpheus Mason, in his article on Chief Justice Taft for the American Bar Association Journal , contrasted Tafts expansive view of the role of the chief justice with the narrow view of presidential power he took while in that office. Taft saw nothing wrong with making his views on possible appointments to the court known to the White House, and was annoyed to be criticized in the press. He was initially a firm supporter of President Coolidge after Hardings death in 1923, but became disillusioned with Coolidges appointments to office and to the bench he had similar misgivings about Coolidges successor, Herbert Hoover. Taft advised the Republican presidents in office while he was chief justice to avoid offside appointments like Brandeis and Holmes. Nevertheless, by 1923, Taft was writing of his liking for Brandeis, whom he deemed a hard worker, and Holmes walked to work with him until age and infirmity required an automobile. Believing that the chief justice should be responsible for the federal courts, Taft felt that he should have an administrative staff to assist him, and the chief justice should be empowered to temporarily reassign judges. He also believed the federal courts had been illrun. Many of the lower courts had lengthy backlogs, as did the Supreme Court. Immediately on taking office, Taft made it a priority to confer with Attorney General Daugherty as to new legislation, and made his case before congressional hearings, in legal periodicals and in speeches across the country. When Congress convened in December 1921, a bill was introduced for 24 new judges, to empower the chief justice to move judges temporarily to eliminate the delays, and to have him chair a body consisting of the senior appellate judge of each circuit. Congress objected to some aspects, requiring Taft to get the agreement of the senior judge of each involved circuit before assigning a judge, but it in September 1922 passed the bill, and the Judicial Conference of Senior Circuit Judges held its first meeting that December. The Supreme Courts docket was congested, swelled by war litigation and laws that allowed a party defeated in the circuit court of appeals to have the case decided by the Supreme Court if a constitutional question was involved. Taft believed an appeal should usually be settled by the circuit court, with only cases of major import decided by the justices. He and other Supreme Court members proposed legislation to make most of the courts docket discretionary, with a case getting full consideration by the justices only if they granted a writ of certiorari. To Tafts frustration, Congress took three years to consider the matter. Taft and other members of the court lobbied for the bill in Congress, and the Judges Bill became law in February 1925. By late the following year, Taft was able to show that the backlog was shrinking. When Taft became chief justice, the court did not have its own building and met in the Capitol. Its offices were cluttered and overcrowded, but Fuller and White had been opposed to proposals to move the court to its own building. In 1925, Taft began a fight to get the court a building, and two years later Congress appropriated money to purchase the land, on the south side of the Capitol. Cass Gilbert had prepared plans for the building, and was hired by the government as architect. Taft had hoped to live to see the court move into the new building, but it did not do so until 1935, after Tafts death. Declining health and death Taft is remembered as the heaviest president he was tall and his weight peaked at toward the end of his presidency, though this later decreased, and by 1929 he weighed just . By the time Taft became chief justice, his health was starting to decline, and he carefully planned a fitness regimen, walking from his home to the Capitol each day. When he also walked home after work, he would usually go by way of Connecticut Avenue and use a particular crossing over Rock Creek after his death the crossing was named the Taft Bridge. Taft insisted that Charles Evans Hughes succeed him as chief justice. At Hoovers inauguration on March 4, 1929, Taft recited part of the oath incorrectly, later writing, my memory is not always accurate and one sometimes becomes a little uncertain, misquoting again in that letter, differently. His health gradually declined over the neardecade of his chief justiceship, and he wrote in 1929, I am older and slower and less acute and more confused. However, as long as things continue as they are, and I am able to answer to my place, I must stay on the court in order to prevent the Bolsheviki from getting control. Taft insisted on going to Cincinnati to attend the funeral of his brother Charles, who died on December 31, 1929 the strain did not improve his own health. When the court reconvened on January 6, 1930, Taft had not returned to Washington, and two opinions were delivered by Van Devanter that Taft had drafted but had been unable to complete because of his illness. Taft went to Asheville, North Carolina for a rest, but by the end of January, he could barely speak and was suffering from hallucinations. Taft was afraid that Stone would be made chief justice he did not resign until he had secured assurances from Hoover that Hughes would be the choice. Returning to Washington after his resignation on February 3, Taft had barely enough strength to sign a reply to a letter of tribute from the eight associate justices. He died at his home in Washington on March 8, 1930. Three days following his death, on March 11, he became the first president and first member of the Supreme Court to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery. James Earle Fraser sculpted his grave marker out of Stony Creek granite. Legacy and historical view Tafts headstone at Arlington National Cemetery Lurie argued that Taft did not receive the public credit for his policies that he should have. Few trusts had been broken up under Roosevelt . Taft, more quietly than his predecessor, filed many more cases than did Roosevelt, and rejected his predecessors contention that there was such a thing as a good trust. This lack of flair marred Tafts presidency according to Lurie, Taft was boring honest, likable, but boring. Scott Bomboy for the National Constitution Center wrote that despite being one of the most interesting, intellectual, and versatile presidents... a chief justice of the United States, a wrestler at Yale, a reformer, a peace activist, and a baseball fan ... today, Taft is best remembered as the president who was so large that he got stuck in the White House bathtub, a story that, despite Tafts fondness for bathtubs, is not true.Coe, Alexis. William Howard Taft Is Still Stuck in the Tub. New York Times . 15 September 2017. 15 September 2017. Taft similarly remains known for another physical characteristic as the last president with facial hair to date. Mason called Tafts years in the White House undistinguished. Coletta deemed Taft to have had a solid record of bills passed by Congress, but felt he could have accomplished more with political skill. Anderson noted that Tafts prepresidential federal service was entirely in appointed posts, and that he had never run for an important executive or legislative position, which would have allowed him to develop the skills to manipulate public opinion, the presidency is no place for onthejob training. According to Coletta, in troubled times in which the people demanded progressive change, he saw the existing order as good. Inevitably linked with Roosevelt, Taft generally falls in the shadow of the flamboyant Rough Rider, who chose him to be president, and who took it away. Yet, a portrait of Taft as a victim of betrayal by his best friend is incomplete as Coletta put it, Was he a poor politician because he was victimized or because he lacked the foresight and imagination to notice the storm brewing in the political sky until it broke and swamped him Adept at using the levers of power in a way his successor could not, Roosevelt generally got what was politically possible out of a situation. Taft was generally slow to act, and when he did, his actions often generated enemies, as in the Ballinger Pinchot affair. Roosevelt was able to secure positive coverage in the newspapers Taft had a judges reticence in talking to reporters, and, with no comment from the White House, hostile journalists would supply the want with a quote from a Taft opponent. And it was Roosevelt who engraved in public memory the image of Taft as a Buchananlike figure, with a narrow view of the presidency which made him unwilling to act for the public good. Anderson pointed out that Roosevelts Autobiography was published after both men had left the presidency , was intended in part to justify Roosevelts splitting of the Republican Party, and contains not a single positive reference to the man Roosevelt had admired and handpicked as his successor. While Roosevelt was biased, he was not alone every major newspaper reporter of that time who left reminiscences of Tafts presidency was critical of him. Taft replied to his predecessors criticism with his constitutional treatise on the powers of the presidency. Fourcent stamp issued for Taft Taft was convinced he would be vindicated by history. After he left office, he was estimated to be about in the middle of U.S. presidents by greatness, and subsequent rankings by historians have by and large sustained that verdict. Coletta noted that this places Taft in good company, with James Madison, John Quincy Adams and McKinley. Lurie catalogued progressive innovations that took place under Taft, and argued that historians have overlooked them because Taft was not an effective political writer or speaker. According to Gould, the clichs about Tafts weight, his maladroitness in the White House, and his conservatism of thought and doctrine have an element of truth, but they fail to do justice to a shrewd commentator on the political scene, a man of consummate ambition, and a resourceful practitioner of the internal politics of his party. Anderson deemed Tafts success in becoming both president and chief justice an astounding feat of inside judicial and Republican party politics, played out over years, the likes of which we are not likely to see again in American history. Taft has been rated among the greatest of the chief justices later Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia noted that this was not so much on the basis of his opinions, perhaps because many of them ran counter to the ultimate sweep of history. A successor as chief justice, Earl Warren, concurred In Tafts case, the symbol, the tag, the label usually attached to him is conservative. It is certainly not of itself a term of opprobrium even when bandied by the critics, but its use is too often confused with reactionary. Most commentators agree that as chief justice, Tafts most significant contribution was his advocacy for reform of the high court, urging and ultimately gaining improvement in the courts procedures and facilities. Mason cited enactment of the Judges Bill of 1925 as Tafts major achievement on the court. According to Anderson, Taft as chief justice was as aggressive in the pursuit of his agenda in the judicial realm as Theodore Roosevelt was in the presidential. The house in Cincinnati where Taft was born and lived as a boy is now the William Howard Taft National Historic Site. Tafts son Robert was a significant political figure, becoming Senate Majority Leader and three times a major contender for the Republican nomination for president. A conservative, each time he was defeated by a candidate backed by the more liberal Eastern Establishment wing of the party. Lurie concluded his account of William Tafts career, Media Collection of video clips of the president Speech The Farmer and the Republican Party, Kansas City, Missouri, 1908 See also Bibliography of William Howard Taft Demographics of the Supreme Court of the United States History of the United States List of Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States Taft on U.S. postage stamps Notes References Sources External links Official William Taft National Historic Site White House biography Speeches Text of a number of Taft speeches, Miller Center of Public Affairs Audio clips of Tafts speeches, Michigan State University Libraries Media coverage Other William Howard Taft A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Extensive essay on William Howard Taft and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and the First Lady Miller Center of Public Affairs Life Portrait of William Howard Taft, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , September 6, 1999 Growing into Public Service William Howard Tafts Boyhood Home, a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places lesson plan Category1857 births Category1930 deaths Category19thcentury American judges Category19thcentury Unitarians Category20thcentury American judges Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury Unitarians CategoryAmerican legal scholars CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican prosecutors CategoryAmerican Unitarians CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryBoston University faculty CategoryBurials at Arlington National Cemetery CategoryChief Justices of the United States CategoryColonial heads of Cuba CategoryFellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences CategoryGovernorsGeneral of the Philippine Islands CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryJudges of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit CategoryJudges of the Superior Court of Cincinnati CategoryMembers of the American Philosophical Society CategoryOhio lawyers CategoryOhio Republicans CategoryPoliticians from Cincinnati CategoryPresidents of the American Bar Association CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryProgressive Era in the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryTaft family CategoryTheodore Roosevelt administration cabinet members CategoryUnited States federal judges appointed by Benjamin Harrison CategoryUnited States federal judges appointed by Warren G. Harding CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1908 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1912 CategoryUnited States Secretaries of War CategoryUnited States Solicitors General CategoryUniversity of Cincinnati College of Law alumni CategoryUniversity of Cincinnati College of Law faculty CategoryYale Law School faculty CategoryYale Universityalumni
Thomas Woodrow Wilson was an American statesman and academic who served as the 28th President of the United States from 1913 to 1921. A member of the Democratic Party, Wilson served as the President of Princeton University from 1902 to 1910 and then ran and was elected as a progressive Democrat to the office of Governor of New Jersey. Wilsons victory in the 1912 presidential election made him the first Southerner elected to the presidency since Zachary Taylor in 1848. He also led the United States during World War I, establishing an activist foreign policy known as Wilsonianism. He was a major leader at the Paris Versailles Peace Conference in 1919, where he championed the proposed League of Nations. However, he was unable to obtain Senate approval for U.S. membership. After he suffered debilitating strokes in September 1919, his wife and staff members handled most of his presidential duties. Born in Staunton, Virginia, he spent his early years in Augusta, Georgia and Columbia, South Carolina. His father was a leading Presbyterian in the Confederacy during the Civil War, and Wilson was always a devout Presbyterian and a proud Southerner. He took a law degree and then one of the first PhDs in political science awarded by Johns Hopkins University. He served as a professor and scholar at various institutions before being selected as President of Princeton University, a position he held from 1902 to 1910. Wilson became a notable academic, arguing for the superiority of the parliamentary system. He was associated with Grover Cleveland and the conservative Bourbon Democrats until 1910, when he moved left. With the help of state Democratic bosses, Wilson won the 1910 Democratic nomination for governor of New Jersey, and was elected as a fresh reformer, holding office from 1911 to 1913. He overthrew the same bosses and gained a national reputation. He won the 1912 Democratic presidential nomination after fortysix rounds of balloting, with support from William Jennings Bryan. Former President Theodore Roosevelts third party candidacy split the Republican Party, which renominated incumbent President William Howard Taft. Wilson won the 1912 election with a plurality of the popular vote and a large majority in the electoral college. Leading the Congress that was now in Democratic hands, he oversaw the passage of progressive legislative policies unparalleled until the New Deal in 1933.John Milton Cooper, Woodrow Wilson A Biography p. 201 The Federal Reserve Act, Federal Trade Commission Act, the Clayton Antitrust Act, and the Federal Farm Loan Act were some of these new policies. Having taken office one month after ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment, Wilson called a special session of Congress, whose work culminated in the Revenue Act of 1913, introducing an income tax and lowering tariffs. Through passage of the Adamson Act that imposed an 8hour workday for railroads, he averted a railroad strike and an ensuing economic crisis. Upon the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Wilson maintained a policy of neutrality, while pursuing a more aggressive policy in dealing with Mexicos civil war. Wilson staffed his government with Southern Democrats who implemented racial segregation at the Treasury, Navy and other Federal offices. In the presidential election of 1916, Wilson faced former New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes. By a narrow margin, he became the first Democrat since Andrew Jackson elected to two consecutive terms. In April 1917, when Germany had resumed unrestricted submarine warfare and sent the Zimmermann Telegram, Wilson asked Congress to declare war in order to make the world safe for democracy. The United States conducted military operations alongside the Allies, although without a formal alliance. During the war, Wilson focused on diplomacy and financial considerations, leaving military strategy to the generals, especially General John J. Pershing. Through the Selective Service Act, conscription sent 10,000 freshly trained soldiers to France per day by the summer of 1918. On the home front, he raised income taxes, borrowing billions of dollars through the publics purchase of Liberty Bonds. He set up the War Industries Board, promoted labor union cooperation, regulated agriculture and food production through the Lever Act, and took direct control of the nations railroad system. Wilson asked Congress for what became the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918, suppressing antidraft activists. The crackdown was intensified by his Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer to include expulsion of noncitizen radicals during the First Red Scare of 1919 1920. Early in 1918, Wilson issued his principles for an end to the war, the Fourteen Points , and in 1919, following an armistice, he traveled to Paris, promoting the formation of a League of Nations and concluding the Treaty of Versailles. Following his return from Europe, Wilson embarked on a nationwide tour in 1919 to campaign for the treaty, but suffered a severe stroke. The treaty was met with serious concern by Senate Republicans, and the Senate ultimately rejected the treaty. Due to his stroke, Wilson secluded himself in the White House, disability having diminished his power and influence, and he failed in his bid to win renomination at the 1920 Democratic National Convention. Wilson retired at the end of his presidency, and he died in 1924. Early life Wilson c. mid1870s Wilson was born to a ScotsIrish American family in Staunton, Virginia, on December 28, 1856, at 18 24 North Coalter Street .Heckscher , p. 4. He was the third of four children of Joseph Ruggles Wilson and Jessie Janet Woodrow .John Milton Cooper, Woodrow Wilson A Biography pp. 13 19 Wilsons paternal grandparents immigrated to the United States from Strabane, County Tyrone, Ireland , in 1807. His mother was born in Carlisle, England, the daughter of Rev. Dr. Thomas Woodrow from Paisley, Scotland, and Marion Williamson from Glasgow. Joseph Wilsons immigrant family settled in Steubenville, Ohio. There his father published a protariff and antislavery newspaper, The Western Herald and Gazette . p. 4 After marrying, Joseph and Jessie Wilson moved to the Southern United States in 1851 and came to fully identify with it, moving from Virginia deeper into the region as Wilson became a minister in Georgia and South Carolina. Joseph Wilson owned slaves, defended slavery, and also set up a Sunday school for his slaves. Both parents identified with the Confederacy during the American Civil War they cared for wounded soldiers at their church, and Wilsons father briefly served as a chaplain to the Confederate Army. Woodrow Wilsons earliest memory, from the age of three, was of hearing that Abraham Lincoln had been elected and that a war was coming. Wilson would forever recall standing for a moment at General Robert E. Lees side and looking up into his face. In 1861 Wilsons father was one of the founders of the Southern Presbyterian Church in the United States after it split from the northern Presbyterians. He served as the first permanent clerk of the Southern Churchs General Assembly, was Stated Clerk for more than three decades from 1865 to 1898, and was Moderator of the PCUS General Assembly in 1879. He became minister of the First Presbyterian Church in Augusta, Georgia, and the family lived there until 1870, when young Wilson was 14. Wilson in 1873 became a communicant member of the Columbia First Presbyterian Church in South Carolina and remained a member throughout his life.Heckscher , p. 23. Education Wilson began reading at age ten the delayed start was possibly caused by dyslexia. He later blamed the lack of schools in the postbellum South. As a teen, he taught himself the Graham shorthand system to compensate, and achieved academically with selfdiscipline, studying at home with his father, then in classes at a small Augusta, Georgia school.Heckscher , p. 22 During Reconstruction, Wilson lived in Columbia, South Carolina, from 1870 to 1874, while his father was professor at the Columbia Theological Seminary.Walworth ch 1 His father moved the family to Wilmington, North Carolina, in 1874 where he was the minister at First Presbyterian Church until 1882. Wilson attended Davidson College in North Carolina for the 1873 74 school year, cut short by illness, then transferred to Princeton as a freshman. He graduated in 1879, a member of Phi Kappa Psi fraternity. In his second year, he studied political philosophy and history, was active in the Whig literary and debating society, and wrote for the Nassau Literary Review . He organized the Liberal Debating SocietyLink, Wilson I5 6 Wilson Papers I 130, 245, 314 and later coached the Whig Clio Debate Panel. In the hotly contested presidential election of 1876, Wilson declared his support for the Democratic Party and its nominee, Samuel J. Tilden.Heckscher , p. 35. In 1879, Wilson attended the University of Virginia School of Law for one year he was involved in the Virginia Glee Club and was president of the Jefferson Literary and Debating Society. While there, he enjoyed frequent trips to his birthplace of Staunton. He visited with cousins, and fell in love with one, Hattie Woodrow, though his affections were unrequited.Heckscher , p. 53. When his health became frail and dictated his withdrawal from studies, he went home to his parents, then living in Wilmington, North Carolina, where he continued his law studies. Wilson was admitted to the Georgia bar and made a brief attempt at law practice in January 1882 he found legal history and substantive jurisprudence interesting, but abhorred the daytoday procedural aspects. After less than a year, he abandoned the practice to pursue his study of political science and history. Both parents expressed concern over a potentially premature decision.Heckscher , pp. 58 59. Ellen Axson Wilson In the fall of 1883, Wilson entered Johns Hopkins University to study history, political science and the German language. Three years later, he completed his doctoral dissertation, Congressional Government A Study in American Politics ,Internet Archive Congressional Government A Study in American Politics , accessed January 6, 2011 and received a Ph.D. Marriage and family In late spring of 1883, Wilson was summoned to Rome, Georgia, to assist in the settlement of his maternal uncle Williams estate, which was being mishandled by a brotherinlaw. While there he met and fell in love with Ellen Louise Axson, the daughter of a minister from Savannah, Georgia he proposed to her and they became engaged in Asheville.Heckscher , pp. 62 65. Wilsons marriage to Ellen was delayed by traumatic developments in her family in late 1883, Ellens father Edward, suffering from depression, was admitted to the Georgia State Mental Hospital, where in 1884 he committed suicide. After closing the family home in Rome, Georgia, and recovering from the initial shock, Ellen gained admission to the Art Students League of New York. After graduation, she pursued portrait art and received a medal for one of her works from the Paris International Exposition. She happily agreed to sacrifice further independent artistic pursuits in order to keep her marriage commitment, and in 1885 she and Wilson married.Heckscher, pp. 71 73. Personal interests Wilson was an automobile enthusiast and, while President, he took daily rides in his favorite car, a 1919 PierceArrow.The Pierce Arrow Limousine, Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library His enjoyment of motoring made him an advocate of funding for public highways.Weingroff, Richard F., President Woodrow Wilson Motorist Extraordinaire, Federal Highway Administration He was also an avid baseball fan, and in 1915 became the first sitting president to attend and throw out the first ball at a World Series game. Wilson had been a center fielder during his Davidson College days and was the Princeton teams assistant manager.By the Numbers 1915, CNNSI , October 17, 2002. Retrieved February 27, 2010. Also, he cycled regularly, taking several cycling vacations in the English Lake District.Wilson, Andrew , A Presidents Love Affair with the Lake District Woodrow Wilsons Second Home , Lakeland Press Agency Wilson later took up golf.Van Natta, Don Jr. , First Off the Tee Presidential Hackers, Duffers, and Cheaters from Taft to Bush PublicAffairs Academic career Wilson worked as a lecturer at Cornell University in 1886 87, where he joined the Irving Literary Society. He next taught at Bryn Mawr College from 1885 until 1888, teaching ancient Greek and Roman history while there, he refused offers from the universities of Michigan and Indiana.Heckscher, pp. 77 82. When Ellen was pregnant with their first child in 1886, the couple decided that Ellen should go to her Aunt Louisa Browns residence in Gainesville, Georgia, to have their first child she arrived just one day before the baby, Margaret, was born in April 1886. Their second child, Jessie, was born in August 1887.Heckscher, p. 85. In 1888, Wilson left Bryn Mawr for Wesleyan University it was a controversial move, as he had signed a threeyear contract with Bryn Mawr in 1887. Both parties claimed contract violations and the matter subsided.Heckscher, pp. 93 94. At Wesleyan, was inducted into Phi Beta Kappaand coached the football team and founded the debate team, which bears his name.Heckscher, p. 96. In February 1890, with the help of friends, Wilson was elected by the Princeton University board to the Chair of Jurisprudence and Political Economy, at an annual salary of 3,000.Heckscher, p. 104. He continued a previous practice of reserving time for a sixweek course in administration at Johns Hopkins.Heckscher, p. 106. He was also a faculty member of the shortlived coordinate college, Evelyn College for Women. Additionally, Wilson became the first lecturer of Constitutional Law at New York Law School, where he taught with Charles Evans Hughes.Walworth, v. 1 Link Representing the American Whig Society, Wilson delivered an oration at Princetons sesquicentennial celebration entitled Princeton in the Nations Service, which was the origin for the schools motto.Beyond FitzRandolph Gates, Princeton Weekly Bulletin June 22, 1998. Wilson became annoyed that Princeton was not living up to its potential, complaining, Theres a little college down in Kentucky which in 60 years has graduated more men who have acquired prominence and fame than has Princeton in her 150 years.The college he was referring to was Centre College. Link Political science author U.S. and British system contrast Wilson, a disciple of Walter Bagehot, considered the United States Constitution to be cumbersome and open to corruption. Wilson favored a parliamentary system for the United States and in the early 1880s wrote, I ask you to put this question to yourselves, should we not draw the Executive and Legislature closer together Should we not, on the one hand, give the individual leaders of opinion in Congress a better chance to have an intimate party in determining who should be president, and the president, on the other hand, a better chance to approve himself a statesman, and his advisers capable men of affairs, in the guidance of Congress. The Politics of Woodrow Wilson , 41 48 Wilsons first political work, Congressional Government , advocated a parliamentary system. He critically described the United States government, with frequent negative comparisons to Westminster. Critics contended the book was written without the benefit of the author observing any operational aspect of the U.S. Congress, and supporters asserted the work was the product of the imagination of a future statesman. The book reflected the greater power of the legislature, relative to the executive, during the postbellum period.Heckscher, pp. 75 76, 83 Wilson later became a regular contributor to Political Science Quarterly , an academic journal.Heckscher, p. 83. Wilsons second publication in 1890 was a textbook, entitled The State , used widely in college courses throughout the country until the 1920s. He argued that government should not be deemed evil and advocated the use of government to allay social ills and advance societys welfare.Heckscher, p. 101. in 1889 Wilson contributed to a U.S. historical series, covering the period from President Andrew Jackson through Reconstruction. His third book, entitled Division and Reunion , was published in 1893 and considered an outstanding contribution to American historical writing.Heckscher, p. 103. Wilsons fourth publication, a fivevolume work entitled History of the American People , was the culmination of a series of articles written for Harpers , and was published in 1902.Heckscher, p. 142. In 1899, Wilson wrote in The State that governments could legitimately promote the general welfare by forbidding child labor, by supervising the sanitary conditions of factories, by limiting the employment of women in occupations hurtful to their health, by instituting official tests of the purity or the quality of goods sold, by limiting the hours of labor in certain trades, and by a hundred and one limitations of the power of unscrupulous or heartless men to outdo the scrupulous and merciful in trade or industry.The Presidency of Woodrow Wilson by Kendrick. A. Clements Wilson believed that Americas system of checks and balances complicated American governance. If government behaved badly, Wilson queried, How is the schoolmaster, the nation, to know which boy needs the whippingWilson, Congressional Government , pp. 186 187. Wilson singled out the United States House of Representatives for particular criticism, saying, divided up, as it were, into fortyseven seignories, in each of which a Standing Committee is the courtbaron and its chairman lordproprietor. These petty barons, some of them not a little powerful, but none of them within reach of the full powers of rule, may at will exercise an almost despotic sway within their own shires, and may sometimes threaten to convulse even the realm itself.Wilson Congressional Government 1885, p. 76. In his last scholarly work, Constitutional Government of the United States , Wilson said that the presidency will be as big as and as influential as the man who occupies it. By the time of his presidency, Wilson hoped that presidents could be party leaders in the same way British prime ministers were. Wilson also hoped that the parties could be reorganized along ideological, not geographic, lines. He wrote, Eight words contain the sum of the present degradation of our political parties No leaders, no principles no principles, no parties. Frozen Republic , 145 Wilson also wrote that charity efforts should be removed from the private domain and made the imperative legal duty of the whole, a position which, according to Robert M. Saunders, seemed to indicate that Wilson was laying the groundwork for the modern welfare state. On the road to becoming governor of New Jersey, Wilson professed his hearty support for reasonable working hours, accident insurance, and just wages. While serving as governor of New Jersey, Wilson vocally supported measures for the benefit of labor such as employers liability, tenementhouse legislation, and factory laws.Railway and Locomotive Engineering A Practical Journal of Railway Motive Power and Rolling Stock, Volume 25, A. Sinclair Company, 1912, P.55 Public administration Wilson also studied public administration, which he called government in action it is the executive, the operative, the most visible side of government, and is of course as old as government itself.Wilson 3 He believed that the study of public administration could enable officials to increase governmental efficiency.The Study of Administration in Political Science Quarterly , June 1887 He faulted political leaders who focused on philosophical issues and the nature of government and dismissed the critical issues of government administration as mere practical detail. He thought such attitudes represented the requirements of smaller countries and populations. By his day, he thought, it is getting to be harder to run a constitution than to frame one.Wilson, 4 He thought it time to straighten the paths of government, to make its business less unbusinesslike, to strengthen and purify its organization, and it to crown its dutifulness.Wilson 5 He summarized the growth of such foreign states as Prussia, France, and England, highlighting the events that led to advances in administration. By contrast, he thought the United States required greater compromise because of the diversity of public opinion and the difficulty of forming a majority opinion thus practical reform of the government was necessarily slow. Yet Wilson insisted that administration lies outside the proper sphere of politicsWilson, 10 and that general laws which direct these things to be done are as obviously outside of and above administration.Wilson, 11 He likened administration to a machine that functions independent of the changing mood of its leaders. Such a line of demarcation is intended to focus responsibility for actions taken on the people or persons in charge. As Wilson put it, public attention must be easily directed, in each case of good or bad administration, to just the man deserving of praise or blame. There is no danger in power, if only it be not irresponsible. If it be divided, dealt out in share to many, it is obscured.Wilson, 12 Essentially, he contended that the items under the discretion of administration must be limited in scope, as to not block, nullify, obfuscate, or modify the implementation of governmental decree made by the executive branch. President of Princeton University Wilson Princetons president Wilson had in the past been offered the presidency at the University of Illinois in 1892, and at the University of Virginia in 1901, both of which he declined. The Princeton trustees promoted Professor Wilson to president in June 1902, replacing Francis Landey Patton, whom the trustees perceived to be an inefficient administrator.Heckscher, p. 110. Although the schools endowment was barely 4million, Wilson sought 2million for a preceptorial system of teaching, 1million for a school of science, and nearly 3million for new buildings and salary increases. As a longterm objective, Wilson sought 3million for a graduate school and 2.5million for schools of jurisprudence and electrical engineering, as well as a museum of natural history.Walworth v. 1 He increased the faculty from 112 to 174, most of whom he selected himself on the basis of their records as outstanding teachers. The curriculum guidelines he developed proved important progressive innovations in the field of higher education.Walworth v. 1 Bragdon, Woodrow Wilson The Academic Years Wilson also made biblical studies a scholarly pursuit, appointed the first Jew and the first Roman Catholic to the faculty, and helped liberate the board from domination by conservative Presbyterians.Heckscher, p. 155. To emphasize the development of expertise, Wilson instituted academic departments and a system of core requirements. Students were to meet for these in groups of six with preceptors, followed by two years of concentration in a selected major. He tried to raise admission standards and to replace the gentlemans C with serious study. Wilson aspired, as he told alumni, to transform thoughtless boys performing tasks into thinking men.Bragdon, Woodrow Wilson The Academic Years Walworth v. 1 Link In 1906 Wilson awoke to find himself blind in the left eye, the result of a blood clot and hypertension. Modern medical opinion surmises Wilson had suffered a stroke he later was diagnosed, as his father had been, with hardening of the arteries he took a Bermuda vacation. He began to exhibit his fathers traits of impatience and intolerance, which would on occasion lead to errors of judgment.Heckscher, p. 156. In 1896 Wilson had, somewhat prophetically, described his problem, in the sesquicentennial speech at Princeton your thorough Presbyterian is not subject to the ordinary laws of life, is of too stubborn a fiber, too unrelaxing a purpose, to suffer mere inconvenience to bring defeat. Prospect House, Wilsons home on Princetons campus When Wilson began vacationing in Bermuda in 1906, he met a socialite, Mary Hulbert Peck. Their visits together became a regular occurrence on his return. Wilson in his letters home to Ellen openly related these gatherings as well his other social events. According to biographer August Heckscher, Ellen could sense a problem, and it became the topic of frank discussion between them. Wilson historians have not conclusively established there was an affair but Wilson did on one occasion write a musing in shorthand on the reverse side of a draft for an editorial my precious one, my beloved Mary.Heckscher, p. 174. Wilson also sent very personal letters which would be used against him by his adversaries later.Cooper pp. 99 101. During his time at Princeton, he attempted to curtail the influence of social elites by abolishing the upperclass eating clubs. He proposed moving the students into colleges, also known as quadrangles. Wilsons Quad Plan was met with fierce opposition from Princetons alumni. Wilson persisted, saying that giving in would be to temporize with evil.Walworth 1109 In October 1907, due to the intensity of alumni opposition, the Board of Trustees withdrew its support for the Quad Plan and instructed Wilson to withdraw it.Bragdon, Woodrow Wilson The Academic Years , 326 327. Not long afterward, Wilson suffered a recurrence of his 1906 ailment as before, a vacation was prescribed and proved beneficial.Heckscher, p. 173. Late in his tenure, Wilson had a confrontation with Andrew Fleming West, dean of the graduate school, and also Wests ally exPresident Grover Cleveland, who was a trustee. Wilson wanted to integrate a proposed graduate school building into the campus core, while West preferred a more distant campus site. In 1909 Wilsons final year at Princeton began with a gift made to the graduate school campaign subject to the graduate school being located off campus the acceptance of this condition by the board was a pivotal defeat for Wilson.Heckscher, p. 183. The national press covered the confrontation as a battle between the elites, represented by West, versus the populists, represented by Wilson. From its outset, Wilson became disenchanted with resistance to his recommendations at Princeton he ruminated on future political leadership. Prior to the Democratic presidential nominating convention in 1908, Wilson had dropped hints to some influential players in the Democratic Party of his interest in the Democratic ticket. While he had no real expectations of being placed on the ticket, he did leave instructions that he should not be offered the vice presidential nomination. He then left for a vacation in Scotland. Party regulars considered his ideas politically as well as geographically detached and fanciful, but the seeds had been sown.Heckscher, p. 176. Wilson later commented that politics was less brusque than university administration.Cooper, John Milton. Woodrow Wilson A Biography . p. 107 Wilson was elected president of the American Political Science Association in 1910, but soon decided to leave his Princeton post and enter New Jersey state politics.Walworth, v 1 ch 6, 7, 8 McGeorge Bundy in 1956 described Wilsons contribution to Princeton Wilson was right in his conviction that Princeton must be more than a wonderfully pleasant and decent home for nice young men it has been more ever since his time.Heckscher, p. 203. Governor of New Jersey Governor Wilson, 1911 In January 1910 Wilson had drawn the attention of New Jerseys former U.S. Senator James Smith, Jr. and George Harvey as the potential Democratic standard bearer in the upcoming gubernatorial election. On July 12, 1910 he was introduced to New Jerseys power players at the Lawyers Club in New York, including James Richard Nugent, Robert S. Hudspeth, Millard F. Ross, and Richard V. Lindabury. The bosses had chosen their man, but his nomination was not a given many, including organized labor, felt Wilson was an inexperienced newcomer.Heckscher, p. 208. Nevertheless, the bosses marshaled their forces at the party convention, and on September 14 Wilson was nominated, despite his endorsement of the local option on the liquor issue in opposition to his political machine. He submitted his letter of resignation to Princeton on October 20.Heckscher, pp. 194, 202 203 Wilsons opponent in the general election was the Republican candidate Vivian M. Lewis, the State Commissioner of Banking and Insurance. Wilsons campaign focused on his promise to be independent of party bosses. Wilson quickly shed his professorial style for more emboldened speechmaking, and presented himself as a fullfledged progressive.Heckscher, p. 214. He soundly defeated Lewis by a margin of more than 650,000 votes, although Republican William Howard Taft had carried New Jersey in the 1908 presidential election by more than 82,000 votes.Heckscher, p. 215.Biography of Woodrow Wilson , New Jersey State Library. Historian Edmund Morris called Wilson in the Governors race a dark horse. He attributed his and others success against the Taft Republicans in 1910 in part to the emergent national progressive message enunciated by Theodore Roosevelt after his presidency.Morris, Edmund, The Tea Party Last Time, Oped, The New York Times , October 31, 2010 . Retrieved November 1, 2010. In the 1910 election, the Democrats also took control of the General Assembly, though the State Senate remained in Republican hands. Wilson appointed Joseph Patrick Tumulty as his private secretary, a position he held throughout Wilsons political career.Heckscher, p. 220. He began formulating his reformist agenda, intending to ignore the demands of his party machinery. After Wilsons election, political boss Smith asked Wilson to endorse his own reelection bid in the state legislature Wilson refused, and endorsed Smiths opponent James Edgar Martine, who had won the primary. When Martine won the seat, Wilson had positioned himself as a new force in the party in that state.Heckscher, pp. 216 217. Wilson concentrated on four major state reforms changes in the election laws, a corrupt practices act, Workmens Compensation, and establishment of a commission to regulate utilities. The Geran bill, drafted by Del. Elmer H Geran, expanded public participation in primaries for all offices including party officials and delegates it was thus directed at the power of the political bosses. It passed the state assembly, albeit by a narrow margin. The corrupt practices law and Workmens Compensation statute soon followed.Heckscher, pp. 225 227. A number of other reforms were realized during the remainder of Wilsons term as governor. Free dental clinics were established, a comprehensive and scientific poor law was enacted, and the usage of common drinking cups was prohibited. Trained nursing was also standardized, while contract labor in all reformatories and prisons was abolished, an indeterminate sentence act was passed, and regulation of weights and measures was carried out.The Survey, Volume 30, Survey Associates, 1913, Page 140 A law was introduced that compelled all railroad companies to pay their employees twice monthly, while regulation of the working hours, health, safety, employment, and age of people employed in mercantile establishments was carried out. Contract labor in penal institutions was abolished. In addition, a law was passed extending the civil service to employees of the State, counties, and municipalities,Woodrow Wilson and New Jersey Made Over by Hester E. Hosford, New York G.P. Putnams Sons, 1912, P.88 labor by women and children was limited, and oversight of factory working conditions was strengthened.Woodrow Wilson by John Milton Cooper, Jr. 6 GOVERNOR, P.135 A new State Board of Education was also set up with the power to conduct inspections and enforce standards, regulate districts borrowing authority, and require special classes for students with handicaps.Woodrow Wilson by John Milton Cooper, Jr. 6 GOVERNOR P.134 Presidential election of 1912 Democratic nomination Wilsons prominence as governor and in the national media induced his presidential campaign in 1912. Wilson committed himself to try for the Democratic nomination in March of the prior year when he spoke at an Atlanta meeting of the Southern Commercial Congress afterwards he said I was given a dinner, breakfast and reception, and on every possible occasion was nominated for the presidencyHeckscher, p. 230 While Wilson was in Atlanta, his wife Ellen, alerted him that key Democrat William Jennings Bryan was visiting Princeton, and recalling Wilsons opposition to him in 1896, invited him for dinner upon Wilsons return. The establishment of rapport with Bryan, the most recent standardbearer of the party, was a success.Heckscher, p. 231 Wilson began a public campaign for the nomination in the South, with a speech to the Pewter Platter Club in Norfolk, Virginia. While he was received enthusiastically, the speech, reformist in nature, was considered provocative and radical by the conservative audience, making the visit on the whole less than positive.Heckscher, pp. 231 232 However, as Wilson was the first Southerner to have a serious chance at the White House since 1848, Southern Democrats in general strongly supported Wilsons campaign for the nomination in 1912.Arthur S. Link, Woodrow Wilson The American as Southerner, Journal of Southern History 361 pp. 3 17 in JSTOR More of Wilsons support came from young progressives in that region, including intellectuals, editors and lawyers. Wilson managed to maneuver through the complexities of local politics. For example, in Tennessee the Democratic Party was divided over Prohibition Wilson was progressive and sober, but not dry, and appealed to both sides. They united behind him to win the presidential election in the state, but divided over state politics and lost the gubernatorial election.Arthur S. Link, Democratic Politics and the Presidential Campaign of 1912 in Tennessee, East Tennessee Historical Societys Publications 1979 51 114 137 After Norfolk, Wilson then proceeded westward to Kansas, Colorado, California, Oregon and Washington he favored voting reforms which empowered the populace, such as the initiative, the referendum and the recall .Heckscher, pp. 232 233. In California Wilson was asked about his views on womens suffrage and though he was firmly opposed, he evasively said that it was a matter for the states to decide.Heckscher, p. 234. In July 1911 Wilson brought William Gibbs McAdoo and Edward Mandell House in to manage the campaign.Heckscher, p. 238. The 1912 Democratic convention in Baltimore was one of the most dramatic conventions in American history only the Republican conventions of 1880 and 1940, and the Democratic convention of 1952 are comparable.Heckscher, p. 245. William F. McCombs, who helped Wilson win the governorship, served as convention chairman. The Republicans had set the stage a week earlier at their convention, nominating incumbent William Howard Taft, with Theodore Roosevelt leaving to launch an independent campaign which would split the party vote.Heckscher, p. 247. Wilson was convinced that the Baltimore convention should be allowed to work its will without his interference so he went golfing and motoring. His assistant Tumulty nearly collapsed under the strain.Heckscher, p. 246. The convention deadlocked for over forty ballots no candidate could reach the twothirds vote required. The leading contender was House Speaker Champ Clark, a prominent progressive, strongest in the border states. Other less charismatic contenders were Governor Judson Harmon of Ohio, and Representative Oscar Underwood of Alabama. Publisher William Randolph Hearst, a leader of the left wing of the party, supported Clark. William Jennings Bryan, the nominee in 1896, 1900 and 1908, played a critical role in his declared opposition to any candidate supported by the financiers of Wall Street. On the tenth ballot, New Yorks delegation went unanimously to Clark, and the battle lines were clearly drawn between the bosses and the rank and file delegates.Heckscher, p. 249. Bryan then announced on the fourteenth ballot that his vote for Clark would be withheld due to the New York vote. Wilsons tally began to climb steadily, and he initially topped Clarks vote on the thirtieth ballot.Heckscher, p. 250. Bryan announced for Wilson, who ultimately won the nomination on the 46th ballot.Arthur S. Link, The Baltimore Convention of 1912, American Historical Review 1945 50 691 713 in JSTOR Wilson chose Indiana Governor Thomas R. Marshall as his running mate.Cooper , 163 68 General election 1912 electoral vote map Wilson directed Chairman of Finance, Henry Morgenthau not to accept contributions from corporations and to prioritize smaller donations from the widest possible quarters of the public, and Morgenthau did this. In order to further embolden Democrats, especially in New Jersey and New York, Wilson set out to ensure the defeat of local incumbent candidates supported by political machines James Smith Jr. and John Dix . He succeeded in both of these efforts and thereby weakened arguments that party control resided with political bosses.Heckscher, pp. 254 255. The pattern of Wilsons speechmaking was exemplified by his performances in Buffalo and New York City. His oratory style was, right out of my mind as it is working at the time. He maintained towards his primary opponent Roosevelt a tone of humorous detachment, describing the Bull Moose party as the irregular Republicans, the variegated Republicans. Wilson shunned the stump speech campaign routine, and initially was reluctant to conduct an extensive campaign tour, but this changed after Roosevelt went on the offensive.Heckscher, pp. 258 259. A notably progressive speech in Minneapolis included the following that property as compared with humanity, as compared with the vital red blood in the American people, must take second place, not first place.Heckscher, p. 260. Wilson frequently sought out Louis D. Brandeis for advice on economic policy, who promoted the concept that corporate trusts be regulated by the government. His campaign increased its focus upon the elimination of monopoly in all forms. Wilson also concluded that major reforms in banking and a lower tariff were needed to eliminate the spheres of entrenched interests which distorted the functioning of the free market.Heckscher, pp. 256 257. In Indianapolis he said that for the next president, there will be no greater burden in our generation than to organize the forces of liberty And to make conquest of a new freedom for America. This comment inspired the title of Wilsons policy of New Freedom, emphasizing lower tariffs and limited federal government, albeit with increased antitrust law enforcement and creation of a new banking regulator, the Federal Reserve System.Heckscher, p. 261. During the election campaign, Wilson also asserted that it was the task of government to make those adjustments of life which will put every man in a position to claim his normal rights as a living, human being. The Warrior and the Priest Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt By John Milton Cooper, III The Great Campaign, 11 Insurgent, P.184 When Roosevelt was wounded by an assassin, Wilson restricted his events to those already scheduled and limited his criticism to the regular Republicans. It was evident by this time that the Wilson movement would not be checked.Heckscher, p. 262. The GOP split between Taft and Roosevelt enlarged Wilsons success in the electoral college. Wilson appealed to African Americans and promised to work for them, gaining some support among them in the North at the expense of the Republicans. But throughout the South, most African Americans had been disenfranchised by actions of state legislatures from 1890 to 1908, and were largely excluded from the political system.J. Morgan Kousser, The Shaping of Southern Politics Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of the OneParty South, 1880 1910 ,COMMITTEE AT ODDS ON REAPPORTIONMENT, The New York Times , December 20, 1900, accessed March 10, 2008 Wilson took 41.8 of the popular vote and won 435 electoral votes from 40 states.Lewis L. Gould, Four Hats in the Ring The 1912 Election and the Birth of Modern American Politics , p. It is not clear if Roosevelt took more votes from fellow Republican Taft, or fellow progressive Wilson.Cooper, John Milton. Woodrow Wilson A Biography. p. 187 Presidency Woodrow Wilson First term After a vacation in Bermuda, Wilson was energized and more aggressive, even combative. He noted the presidency was an office in which a man must put on his war paint. In Chicago, he addressed the Commercial Club, including some of the most powerful industrial and financial leaders of the Midwest he emphasized his progressivism and called his audience to account for their malpractices in business affairs.Heckscher, p. 26567. Woodrow Wilson sworn in March 4, 1913 In his inaugural address Wilson reiterated his agenda for lower tariffs and banking reform, as well as aggressive trust and labor legislation. The Wilsons decided against an inaugural ball and instead gathered with family and friends at the White House.Heckscher, p. 274. As the first Southerner elected to the presidency since 1848, Wilson inspired celebrations in the capital.William Keylor, The longforgotten racial attitudes and policies of Woodrow Wilson, March 4, 2013, Professor Voices , Boston University, accessed March 10, 2016 Official presidential portrait of Woodrow Wilson Wilsons demand for private reflection was evident when he immediately announced that office seekers were not permitted to visit the White House. His decisionmaking style was to use solitude in conjunction with prevailing opinions in making decisions.Heckscher, p. 276. Wilsons personal staff reflected his preferences Tumultys position provided a political buffer and intermediary with the press, and his irrepressible spirits offset the presidents often dour disposition.Heckscher, p. 277. Another close member of Wilsons personal staff was his physician, Navy medical officer Cary T. Grayson. He became familiar with the presidents medical history and confirmed his circulatory problem and hardening of the arteries.Heckscher, pp. 278 280. Wilson pioneered twiceweekly press conferences in the White House. Though they were modestly effective, the president prohibited his being quoted and was particularly indeterminate in his statements.Heckscher, pp. 283 284. The first such press conference was on March 15, 1913, when reporters were allowed to ask him questions. In 1913, he became the first president to deliver the State of the Union address in person since 1801, as Thomas Jefferson had discontinued this practice. The only Democrat besides Grover Cleveland to be elected president since 1856, Wilson recognized his partys need for highlevel federal patronage.Arthur S. Link, Woodrow Wilson The American as Southerner, Journal of Southern History , Vol. 36, No. 1 , pp. 3 17 in JSTOR Wilson worked closely with Southern Democrats. In Wilsons first month in office, Postmaster General Albert S. Burleson brought up the issue of racially segregating workplaces in a cabinet meetingKathleen L. Wolgemuth, Woodrow Wilson and Federal Segregation, The Journal of Negro History Vol. 44, No. 2 , pp. 158173, accessed March 10, 2016 and urged the president to establish this policy across the government, in restrooms, cafeterias and work spaces. Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo also permitted lowerlevel officials to racially segregate employees in the workplaces of those departments. By the end of 1913 many departments, including the Navy, had workspaces segregated by screens. Restrooms and cafeterias were also segregated, although no executive order had been issued. Segregation was urged by conservative groups, such as the Fair Play Association. Wilson defended his administrations segregation policy in a July 1913 letter responding to Oswald Garrison Villard, publisher of the New York Evening Post and founding member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Wilson suggested that segregation removed friction between the races. Ross Kennedy says that Wilson complied with predominant public opinion, but his change in federal practices was protested in letters from both blacks and whites to the White House, mass meetings, newspaper campaigns and official statements by both black and white church groups. The presidents AfricanAmerican supporters, who had crossed party lines to vote for him, were bitterly disappointed, and they and Northern leaders protested the changes. Wilson continued to defend his policy, as in a letter to prominent black minister Rev. H.A. Bridgman, editor of the Congregation and Christian World. Heckscher argues that Wilson had promised African Americans to deal generously with racial injustices, but did not deliver on these assurances.Heckscher, pp. 291 292. Segregation in government offices and discriminatory hiring practices had been institutionalised by President Theodore Roosevelt and continued by President Taft the Wilson administration continued and escalated these practices.August Meier and Elliott Rudwick. The Rise of Segregation in the Federal Bureaucracy, 1900 1930. Phylon 28.2 178184. in JSTOR In a 1913 cartoon, Wilson primes the economic pump to get the economy moving, with tariff, currency and antitrust laws In an early foreign policy matter, Wilson responded to an angry protest by the Japanese government when the state of California proposed legislation that excluded Japanese people from land ownership in the state.Herbert P. Le Pore, Prelude to Prejudice Hiram Johnson, Woodrow Wilson, and the California Alien Land Law Controversy of 1913. Southern California Quarterly 61.1 99110. in JSTOR Japans sense of humiliation remained high for decades to come.Link pp. 84 87 In implementing economic policy, Wilson had to transcend the sharply opposing policy views of the Southern and agrarian wing of the Democratic Party led by Bryan, and the probusiness Northern wing led by urban political bosses.Heckscher, p. 304. In his Columbia University lectures of 1907, Wilson had said the whole art of statesmanship is the art of bringing the several parts of government into effective cooperation for the accomplishment of particular common objects. As he took up the first item of his New Freedom agenda lowering the tariffs he quite adroitly applied this artistry. With large Democratic majorities in Congress and a healthy economy, Wilson seized the opportunity to achieve his agenda.Link Wilson also made quick work of realizing his pledges to beef up antitrust regulation and to bring reform to banking and currency matters.Clements, Presidency ch. 3 Tariff legislation and income tax To facilitate reduction of the tariffs, Wilson garnered unexpected support from a previous rival Oscar Underwood, Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, and Sen. Furnifold M. Simmons, Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. In May 1913, the Underwood Tariff passed in the House by a vote of 274 to 5 it would take a bit longer passing in the Senate in September and was signed by Wilson three weeks later.Dewey W. Grantham, Southern congressional leaders and the new freedom, 1913 1917. Journal of Southern History 134 439459. Its effects were soon overwhelmed by the changes in trade caused by World War I.Arthur S. Link, Wilson The New Freedom pp. 177 98 Wilson mobilized public opinion behind the tariff changes by denouncing corporate lobbyists in an address to Congress, and by staging an elaborate signing ceremony.Vincent W. Howard, Woodrow Wilson, The Press, and Presidential Leadership Another Look at the Passage of the Underwood Tariff, 1913, CR The Centennial Review , 242 pp. 167 184 The revenue lost by the lower tariff was replaced by a new federal income tax, authorized by the 16th Amendment. Federal Reserve System Map of Federal Reserve Districts black circles, Federal Reserve Banks black squares, District branches red circles and Washington HQ starblack circle Wilson had not waited for completion of the tariff legislation to proceed with his next item of reform banking which he initiated in June 1913. After consulting with Brandeis, Wilson declared the banking system must be public not private, must be vested in the government itself so that the banks must be the instruments, not the masters, of business.Heckscher, pp. 31617. He tried to find a middle ground between conservative Republicans, led by Senator Nelson W. Aldrich, and the powerful left wing of the Democratic party, led by William Jennings Bryan, who strenuously denounced private banks and Wall Street. The latter group wanted a governmentowned central bank that could print paper money as Congress required. The compromise, based on the Aldrich Plan but sponsored by Democratic Congressmen Carter Glass and Robert Owen, allowed the private banks to control the 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks, but appeased the agrarians by placing controlling interest in the System in a central board appointed by the president with Senate approval. Moreover, Wilson convinced Bryans supporters that because Federal Reserve notes were obligations of the government, the plan met their demands for an elastic currency. Having 12 regional banks, with designated geographic districts, was meant to weaken the influence of the powerful New York banks, a key demand of Bryans allies in the South and West, and was a key factor in winning Glass support.Link pp. 43 53 The Federal Reserve Act passed in December 1913.Clements, Presidency , pp. 40 44. Wilson named Paul Warburg and other prominent bankers to direct the new system. While power was supposed to be decentralized, the New York branch dominated the Fed as the first among equals. The new system began operations in 1915 and played a major role in financing the Allied and American war effort.Link, Wilson The New Freedom pp. 199 240 The strengthening of the Federal Reserve during the Great Depression was later a major accomplishment of Franklin D. Roosevelts New Deal.Cooper, John Milton. Woodrow Wilson A Biography. p. 195 At the end of 1913, summing up the presidents efficacy, the Saturday Evening Post magazine stated, This administration is Woodrow Wilsons and nonothers. He is the top, middle and bottom of it. There is not an atom of divided responsibility... the Democratic Party revolves about him. He is the center of it the biggest Democrat in the country the leader and the chief.Heckscher, p. 321. Antitrust and other measures Wilson began pushing for legislation which culminated with the Federal Trade Commission Act signed in September 1914. In doing so, Wilson broke with his predecessors practice of litigating the antitrust issue in the courts, known as trustbusting the new Federal Trade Commission provided a new regulatory approach, to encourage competition and reduce perceived unfair trade practices. In addition, he pushed through Congress the Clayton Antitrust Act making certain business practices illegal, such as price discrimination, agreements prohibiting retailers from handling other companies products, and directorates and agreements to control other companies. The power of this legislation was greater than that of previous antitrust laws since it dictated accountability of individual corporate officers and clarified guidelines. This law was considered the Magna Carta of labor by Samuel Gompers because it ended union liability antitrust laws. In 1916, under threat of a national railroad strike, Wilson approved legislation that increased wages and cut working hours of railroad employees there was no strike. In the summer of 1914 Wilson gained repeal of toll exemptions at the Panama Canal for American ships this was received positively by the international community, as a cessation of past discrimination against foreign commerce. The measure was considered unpatriotic by U.S. business interests and opponents such as Tammany Hall.Heckscher, pp. 325 326. With the President reaching out to new constituencies, a series of programs were targeted at farmers. The Smith Lever Act of 1914 created the modern system of agricultural extension agents sponsored by the state agricultural colleges. The agents taught new techniques to farmers. The 1916 Federal Farm Loan Act provided for issuance of lowcost longterm mortgages to farmers.Clements, Presidency , ch 4. Child labor was curtailed by the Keating Owen Act of 1916, but the Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional in 1918. H.D. Hindman Child labor an American history Mexican Revolution Taft had supported the revolution that brought about the election of Francisco I. Madero as president of Mexico. Wilson, who took office shortly after Maderos assassination in 1913, rejected the legitimacy of Huertas government of butchers and demanded Mexico hold democratic elections. Wilsons unprecedented approach meant no recognition and doomed Huertas prospects. Wilsonian idealism became a reason for American intervention in Latin America until the 1920s and 1930s, when moralistic interventions were abandoned in favor of realism.Peter V. N. Henderson, Woodrow Wilson, Victoriano Huerta, and the Recognition Issue in Mexico, The Americas 412 pp. 151176 in JSTOR After Huerta arrested U.S. navy personnel in the port of Tampico Wilson sent his navy to occupy Veracruz. War between the United States and Mexico was averted through negotiations, and in 1916 his reelection campaign for president boasted he had kept us out of war. Huerta fled Mexico and Carranza came to power.Cooper 32023 Pancho Villa Though the administration had achieved the desired result, it was a pyrrhic victory, as Carranzas lieutenant, Pancho Villa, presented a more serious threat in 1916. In early 1916 Pancho Villa raided Columbus, an American town in New Mexico, killing eighteen Americans and causing an enormous nationwide demand for his punishment. Wilson ordered Gen. John Pershing and 4000 troops into northern Mexico to capture Villa, which they were unable to do even as Pershing continued his pursuit deep into Mexico. President Carranza then pivoted against the Americans and accused them of a punitive invasion. However tensions subsided and bilateral negotiations began. The issue had become a possible war with Germany so Wilson ended Pershings diversion into Mexico in February 1917. In January, Germanys foreign minister sent Mexico the Zimmermann Telegram inviting it to join in war against the United States. Washington learned of the Zimmermann proposal on February 23 and dtente with Mexico was essential. Wilson accorded Carranza diplomatic recognition in April, after Congress declared war on Germany. Biographer Arthur Link calls it Carranzas victory his successful handling of the chaos inside Mexico, as well as over Wilsons policies. Mexico was now free to develop its revolution without American pressure.Link Wilson 4 194 221, 280 318. Link Wilson 551 54, 328 39 Pershing became a national figure. Wilson selected him to command the American forces being sent to fight in France. Miners strike, wifes death and remarriage Wilsons second wife, Edith Bolling In a 1914 dispute between Colorado miners and their company, a confrontation resulted in the Ludlow Massacre the deaths of eight strikers, eleven children and two mothers. Part owner John D. Rockefeller, Jr. refused Wilsons offer of mediation, conditioned upon collective bargaining, so Wilson sent in U.S. troops. While Wilson succeeded in bringing order to the situation, and demonstrated support for the labor union, the miners unconditional surrender to the implacable owners was a defeat for Wilson.Heckscher, p. 330. His wife Ellens failing health, due to kidney failure, worsened in the spring of 1914 after a fall, she was bedridden, then rallied briefly, but Wilson wrote my dear one grows weaker and weaker, with a pathetic patience and sweetness. He was at her bedside to the end, which came August 6, when Wilson despairingly said Oh my God, what am I to do. Wilson later wrote accurately of his mourning and depression, Of course you know what has happened to me God has stricken me almost beyond what I can bear. Six months of depression followed for him, though mourning continued. At the same time that Wilsons private world shattered, World War I broke out in Europe, and this momentously changed his political life.Heckscher, pp. 333 335. In January 1915, Wilson emerged from his depression during a spirited speech in Indianapolis where he said, the trouble with the Republican Party is that it has not had a new idea for thirty years the Republican Party is still a covert and a refuge for those who are afraid, for those who want to consult their grandfathers about everything.Heckscher, p. 345. Another sign of Wilsons emotional restoration was the aggressiveness with which he pursued passage of a shippurchase bill to bulk up the inadequately equipped merchant marine. This lasted until March 1915, when he moderated, drew back from the bill and, without its passage, congratulated the Congress for its work in the session just ended his initial journey through mourning was evident.Heckscher, p. 347. In February 1915 Wilson had met Edith Bolling Galt, a southern widow and jeweler. After several meetings, he fell in love, and in May, Wilson proposed. He was rebuffed initially but Wilson was undeterred and the courtship continued.Heckscher, pp. 348 350. Edith initially did not pursue the furtherance of their physical interaction with the vigor of Wilson, but she gradually warmed to the relationship and they became secretly engaged in the fall of 1915.Heckscher, pp. 352 353. Many in Wilsons camp had become concerned about the appearance of a premature romance soon after the death of his wife the engagement was made public in October and they were married on December 18, 1915. Wilson was the third president to marry while in office after John Tyler in 1844 and Grover Cleveland in 1886.Heckscher, pp. 350, 356. Events leading to U.S. entry into World War I Wilson and Jingo, the American War Dog depicts hawks wanting the U.S. to enter World War I From 1914 until early 1917, Wilsons primary objective was to keep America out of the war in Europe, and his policy was, the true spirit of neutrality, which is the spirit of impartiality and fairness and friendliness to all concerned.Heckscher, p. 339. The president insisted that all government actions be neutral, and that the belligerents must respect that neutrality according to the norms of international law. Wilson told the Senate in August 1914 when the war began that the United States, must be impartial in thought as well as in action, must put a curb upon our sentiments as well as upon every transaction that might be construed as a preference of one party to the struggle before another. He was ambiguous whether he meant the United States as a nation or meant all Americans as individuals. Wilson has been accused of violating his own rule of neutrality. Later that month he explained himself privately to his top foreign policy advisor Colonel House, who recalled the episode later I was interested to hear him express as his opinion what I had written him some time ago in one of my letters, to the effect that if Germany won it would change the course of our civilization and make the United States a military nation. He also spoke of his deep regret, as indeed I did to him in that same letter, that it would check his policy for a better international ethical code. He felt deeply the destruction of Louvain Belgium, and I found him as unsympathetic with the German attitude as is the balance of America. He goes even further than I in his condemnation of Germanys part in this war, and almost allows his feeling to include the German people as a whole rather than the leaders alone. He said German philosophy was essentially selfish and lacking in spirituality. When I spoke of the Kaiser building up the German machine as a means of maintaining peace, he said, What a foolish thing it was to create a powder magazine and risk someones dropping a spark into it He thought the war would throw the world back three or four centuries. I did not agree with him. He was particularly scornful of Germany s disregard of treaty obligations, and was indignant at the German Chancellor s designation of the Belgian Treaty as being only a scrap of paper....But although the personal feeling of the President was with the Allies, he insisted then and for many months after, that this ought not to affect his political attitude, which he intended should be one of strict neutrality. He felt that he owed it to the world to prevent the spreading of the conflagration, that he owed it to the country to save it from the horrors of war.E. M. House, Intimate Papers of Colonel House, Vol. 1 19121915 edited by Charles Seymour, vol 1 p 299, dated August 30, 1914 He made numerous offers to mediate and sent Colonel House on diplomatic missions both sides politely dismissed these overtures. When Britain declared a blockade of neutral ships carrying contraband goods to Germany, Wilson mildly protested nonlethal British violations of neutral rights the British knew that it would not be a casus belli for the United States.Clements, Presidency , ch. 7. In early 1915 Germany declared the waters around Great Britain to be a war zone Wilson dispatched a note of protest, imposing strict accountability on Germany for the safety of neutral ships. The meaning of the policy, dubiously applied to specific incidents, evolved with the policy of neutrality, but ultimately formed the substance of U.S. responses over the next two years.Heckscher, p. 361. The main crisis came when a German uboat sank the British ocean liner RMS Lusitania in May 1915. International law required a warning so that passengers and crew could board life boats. No warning was issued and the ship sank in 18 minutes, with a thousand deaths including over 100 Americans. Wilson said, There is such a thing as a man being too proud to fight. There is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force that it is right. Many reacted to these remarks with contempt.Heckscher, pp. 363, 365. Wilson protested to Berlin but its reply was evasive. Secretary of State Bryan, strongly opposed to war, resigned, and was replaced by Robert Lansing. The White Star liner the SS Arabic was then torpedoed, with two American casualties. Wilson threatened a diplomatic break unless Germany repudiated the action Germany then gave a written promise liners will not be sunk by our submarines. Wilson had won a promise that merchant ships would not be sunk without warning and most importantly he had kept the U.S. out of the war.Heckscher, pp. 366 369.. Meanwhile, Wilson requested and received funds in the final 1916 appropriations bill to provide for 500,000 troops. It also included a fiveyear Navy plan for major construction of battleships, cruisers, destroyers and submarines showing Wilsons dedication to a big Navy.Heckscher, p. 378. In March 1916 the SS Sussex , an unarmed ferry under the French flag, was torpedoed in the English Channel and four Americans were counted among the dead the Germans had flouted the post Lusitania exchanges. The president demanded the Germans reject their submarine tactics.Heckscher, pp. 384 385 Wilson drew praise when he succeeded in wringing from Germany a pledge to constrain their Uboat warfare to the rules of cruiser warfare. This was a clear departure from existing practices a diplomatic concession from which Germany could only more brazenly withdraw, and regrettably did.Heckscher, p. 387. Wilson made a plea for postwar world peace in May 1916 his speech recited the right of every nation to its sovereignty, territorial integrity and freedom from aggression. So sincerely do we believe these things, Wilson said, that I am sure that I speak the mind and wish of the people of America when I say that the United States is willing to become a partner in any feasible association of nations formed in order to realize these objectives. At home the speech was seen as a turning point in policy. In Europe the words were received by the British and the French without comment. His harshest European critics rightly thought the speech reflected indifference on Wilsons part indeed, Wilson never wavered from a belief that the war was the result of corrupt European power politics.Heckscher, p. 392. Wilson made his final offer to mediate peace on December 18, 1916. As a preliminary, he asked both sides to state their minimum terms necessary for future security. The Central Powers replied that victory was certain, and the Allies required the dismemberment of their enemies empires no desire for peace existed, and the offer lapsed.Cooper, Woodrow Wilson pp. 362 76 Presidential election of 1916 Portrait photograph of Woodrow Wilson, 1916 Wilson accepts the Democratic Party nomination, 1916 Wilsons remarriage rejuvenated his personal aspirations for reelection. Edith Wilson enjoyed, as Ellen never had, the crowds and the power as a close collaborator with her husband.Heckscher, pp. 393 394. Executive decisions just prior to the campaign also enabled Wilson to bolster his political mastery. He was presented with a vacancy on the Supreme Court, which he succeeded in filling with a controversial nominee, Louis Brandeis, the first Jewish member of the court.Heckscher, pp. 396 397. Also, in the summer of 1916 the nations economy was endangered by a railroad strike. The president called the parties to a White House summit in August after two days and no results, Wilson proceeded to settle the issue, using the maximum eighthour work day as the linchpin. Once the Congress passed the Adamson bill incorporating the presidents proposal, the strike was cancelled. Wilson was praised for averting a national economic disaster, though the law was received with howls from conservatives denouncing a sellout to the unions and a surrender by Congress to an imperious president.Heckscher, p. 409. In the campaign, McCombs was replaced as chairman of the Democratic Party by Vance C. McCormick, a leading progressive, and Ambassador Henry Morgenthau was recalled from Turkey to manage campaign finances.Heckscher, p. 397. Colonel House played an important role in the campaign. He planned its structure set its tone helped guide its finance chose speakers, tactics, and strategy and, not least, handled the campaigns greatest asset and greatest potential liability its brilliant but temperamental candidate. Wilson, renominated without opposition, employed his campaign slogan He kept us out of war, though he never promised unequivocally to stay out of the war. In his acceptance speech on September 2, 1916, Wilson pointedly warned Germany that submarine warfare resulting in American deaths would not be tolerated, saying The nation that violates these essential rights must expect to be checked and called to account by direct challenge and resistance. It at once makes the quarrel in part our own. 1916 Electoral Vote Map As the Party platform was drafted, Senator Owen of Oklahoma urged Wilson to take ideas from the Progressive Party platform of 1912 as a means of attaching to our party progressive Republicans who are in sympathy with us in so large a degree. At Wilsons request, Owen highlighted federal legislation to promote workers health and safety, prohibit child labour, provide unemployment compensation and establish minimum wages and maximum hours. Wilson, in turn, included in his draft platform a plank that called for all work performed by and for the federal government to provide a minimum wage, an eighthour day and sixday workweek, health and safety measures, the prohibition of child labour, and safeguards for female workers and a retirement program.Cooper, John Milton Jr. Woodrow Wilson p 335 Wilsons opponent was Republican Charles Evans Hughes, former governor of New York with a progressive record similar to Wilsons as governor of New Jersey. Theodore Roosevelt commented that the only thing different between Hughes and Wilson was a shave. However, Hughes had to try to hold together a coalition of conservative Taft supporters and progressive Roosevelt partisans, and his campaign never assumed a definite form. Wilson ran on his record and ignored Hughes, reserving his attacks for Roosevelt. When asked why he did not attack Hughes directly, Wilson told a friend, Never murder a man who is committing suicide.The American Presidency Project Wilson quote The election outcome was in doubt for several days and was determined by several close states. Wilson won California by 3,773 of almost a million votes cast, and New Hampshire by 56 votes. Hughes won Minnesota by 393 votes out of over 358,000. In the final count, Wilson had 277 electoral votes vs. Hughes 254. Wilson was able to win by picking up many votes that had gone to Teddy Roosevelt or Eugene V. Debs in 1912.William M. Leary, Jr. Woodrow Wilson, Irish Americans, and the Election of 1916, The Journal of American History , Vol. 54, No. 1. , pp. 57 72. in JSTOR By the time Hughes concession telegram arrived, Wilson commented it was a little motheaten when it got here.Heckscher, p. 415. In December 1916, a month after his reelection, Wilson addressed a conference on social insurance in which he spoke of how a conference like that gave evidence of the dominant interest of our own time, and one of the best elements of social insurance is social understanding an interchange of views and a comprehension of interests which for a long time was only too rare. Second term Entry into World War I Wilson objected to Britains seizure of mail from neutral ships and its blacklisting of firms that did any business with Germany. Wilson insisted a league of nations was the solution to ending the war.Heckscher, pp. 401 403, 430. Wilson found it increasingly difficult to maintain neutrality, after Germany rescinded earlier promises the Arabic pledge and the Sussex pledge. Early in 1917 the German ambassador Johann von Bernstorf informed the U.S. of Germanys commitment to unrestricted submarine warfare.Heckscher, p. 427. Then came the revelation of the Zimmermann Telegram, in which Germany attempted to enlist Mexico as a fighting ally.Thomas Boghardt, The Zimmermann telegram intelligence, diplomacy, and Americas entry into World War I . Wilsons reaction after consulting the cabinet and the Congress was a minimal one that diplomatic relations with the Germans be brought to a halt. The president said, We are the sincere friends of the German people and earnestly desire to remain at peace with them. We shall not believe they are hostile to us unless or until we are obliged to believe it.Heckscher, pp. 428 429 In March 1917 several American ships were sunk by Germany the cabinet was unanimously in favor of war.Heckscher, pp. 436 437 Gen. John J. Pershing Colonel House Wilson delivered his War Message to a special session of Congress on April 2, 1917, declaring that Germanys latest pronouncement had rendered his armed neutrality policy untenable and asking Congress to declare Germanys war stance was an act of war.For detailed coverage of the speech see NY Times main headline, April2, 1917, President Calls for War Declaration, Stronger Navy, New Army of 500,000 Men, Full Cooperation With Germanys Foes He proposed the United States enter the war to vindicate principles of peace and justice in the life of the world as against selfish and autocratic power. The German government, Wilson said, means to stir up enemies against us at our very doors. He then also warned that if there should be disloyalty, it will be dealt with a firm hand of repression.Cooper, John Milton, Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace , Baltimore MD Johns Hopkins University Press, , p. 190 Wilson closed with The declaration of war by the United States against Germany passed Congress by strong bipartisan majorities on April 4, 1917, with opposition from ethnic German strongholds and remote rural areas in the South. Wilson refused to make a formal alliance with Britain or France but operated as an associated power an informal ally with military cooperation through the Supreme War Council in London.David F. Trask, The United States in the Supreme War Council American War Aims and InterAllied Strategy, 1917 1918 . The U.S. raised a massive army through conscription and Wilson gave command to Pershing, with complete authority as to tactics, strategy and some diplomacy. Colonel House was Wilsons main channel of communication with the British government.Edward M. Coffman, The War to End All Wars ch. 3 March 1917 also brought the first of two revolutions in Russia, which impacted the strategic role of the U.S. in the war. The overthrow of the imperial government removed a serious barrier to Americas entry into the European conflict, while the second revolution in November relieved the Germans of a major threat on their eastern front, and allowed them to dedicate more troops to the Western front, thus making U.S. forces central to Allied success in battles of 1918. Wilson initially rebuffed pleas from the Allies to dedicate military resources to an intervention in Russia against the Bolsheviks, based partially on his experience from attempted intervention in Mexico nevertheless he ultimately was convinced of the potential benefit and agreed to dispatch a limited force to assist the Allies on the eastern front.Georg Schild, review of Carl J. Richard When the United States Invaded Russia Woodrow Wilsons Siberian Disaster. Journal of American History 100.3 864 864.online The Germans launched an offensive at Arras which prompted an accelerated deployment of troops by Wilson to the Western front by August 1918 a million American troops had reached France. The Allies initiated a counter offensive at Somme and by August the Germans had lost the military initiative and an Allied victory was in sight. In October came a message from the new German Chancellor Prince Max of Baden to Wilson requesting a general armistice. In the exchange of notes with Germany they agreed the Fourteen Points in principle be incorporated in the armistice House then procured agreement from France and Britain, but only after threatening to conclude a unilateral armistice without them. Wilson ignored Gen. Pershings plea to drop the armistice and instead demand an unconditional surrender by Germany.Heckscher, pp. 479 88. Home front Liberty Loan drive in front of City Hall, New Orleans. On City Hall is a banner reading Food will win the war dont waste it. Women workers in ordnance shops, Pennsylvania, 1918 The War Industries Board, headed by Bernard Baruch, was established to set U.S. war manufacturing policies and goals future President Herbert Hoover led the Food Administration, to conserve food the Federal Fuel Administration, run by Henry Garfield, introduced daylight saving time and rationed fuel supplies William McAdoo was in charge of war bond efforts and Vance McCormick headed the War Trade Board. All of the above, known collectively as the war cabinet, met weekly with Wilson at the White House.Heckscher, p. 469. These and other bodies were headed by businessmen recruited by Wilson for adollaraday salary to make the government more efficient in the war effort.Clements, Presidency ch 8 More favorable treatment was extended to those unions that supported the U.S. war effort, such as the American Federation of Labor . Wilson worked closely with Samuel Gompers and the AFL, the railroad brotherhoods, and other moderate unions, which saw enormous growth in membership and wages during Wilsons administration. In the absence of rationing consumer prices soared income taxes also increased and workers suffered. Despite this, appeals to buy war bonds were highly successful. The purchase of wartime bonds had the result of shifting the cost of the war to the taxpayers of the affluent 1920s. Antiwar groups, anarchists, communists, Industrial Workers of the World members, and other antiwar groups attempting to sabotage the war effort were targeted by the Department of Justice many of their leaders were arrested for incitement to violence, espionage, or sedition.Cooper, John Milton, Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace , Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press, , pp. 201, 209 Wilson also established the first western propaganda office, the United States Committee on Public Information, headed by George Creel, the Creel Commission, which circulated patriotic antiGerman appeals and conducted censorship of materials considered seditious. To further counter disloyalty to the war effort at home, Wilson pushed through Congress the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918 to suppress antiBritish, proGerman, or antiwar statements. While he welcomed socialists who supported the war, he pushed at the same time to arrest and deport foreignborn enemies.Avrich, Paul, Sacco and Vanzetti The Anarchist Background , Princeton Princeton University Press, , , pp. 93 94, 124, 127, 130 133 Many recent immigrants, resident aliens without U.S. citizenship, who opposed Americas participation in the war were deported to Soviet Russia or other nations under the powers granted in the Immigration Act of 1918.Murray, Robert K., Red Scare A Study in National Hysteria, 1919 1920 , pp. 250 251 In an effort at reform and to shake up his Mobilization program, Wilson removed the chief of the Army Signal Corps and the chairman of the Aircraft Production Board on April 18, 1918.Leuchtenburg , pp. 255 256 On May 16, the President launched an investigation, headed by Republican Charles Evans Hughes, into the War Department and the Council of Defense. The Hughes report released on October 31 found no major corruption violations or theft in Wilsons Mobilization program, although the report found incompetence in the aircraft program.Leuchtenburg , pp. 256 257 U.S. Department of Justice , Report on the Aircraft Inquiry , Washington D.C. Pusey, Hughes , I, pp. 378 382 With congressional elections approaching, in 1918 Wilson made an appeal to the public for the retention of a Democratic majority and this seriously backfired due to its selfserving tone Republicans successfully picked up majorities in both houses of Congress.Seward W. Livermore, The Sectional Issue in the 1918 Congressional Elections. Mississippi Valley Historical Review 351 29 60. in JSTOR The Fourteen Points Wilson initiated a secret series of studies named The Inquiry, primarily focused on Europe, and carried out by a group in New York which included geographers, historians and political scientists the group was directed by Col. House.Heckscher, p. 470. The studies culminated in a speech by Wilson to Congress on January 8, 1918, wherein he articulated Americas long term war objectives. It was the clearest expression of intention made by any of the belligerent nations. The speech, known as the Fourteen Points, was authored mainly by Walter Lippmann and projected Wilsons progressive domestic policies into the international arena. The first six dealt with diplomacy, freedom of the seas and settlement of colonial claims. Then territorial issues were addressed and the final point, the establishment of an association of nations to guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of all nations a League of Nations. The address was translated into many languages for global dissemination.Heckscher, p. 471. Peace Conference 1919 The Big Four at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, following the end of World War I. Wilson is standing next to Georges Clemenceau at right. When the time came, Wilson spent six months in Paris for the Peace Conference, thereby becoming the first U.S. president to travel to Europe while in office.Heckscher, p. 458. He disembarked from the George Washington in Brest on December 13. While in Italy for meetings with King Victor Emmanuel III and Prime Minister Vittorio Orlando, he became the first incumbent U.S. president to have an audience with a reigning pope, when he visited Pope Benedict XV at the Apostolic Palace. Wilson took a break from the negotiations and departed February 14, 1919 for home, then returned to Paris three weeks later and remained until the conclusion of a treaty in June.Heckscher, p. 500 Heckscher describes Wilson, during the first four weeks of the Conference as, playing, with force and discretion, a commanding role he established his priorities, secured accommodation on major issues and won preliminary acceptance of the League.Heckscher, p. 536. He promoted his plan in France, and then at home in February. Wilson gave a speech at the Metropolitan Opera House in defense of the League he was more insistent about it than ever. Heckscher contends that the enduring image of Wilson as a grim, unsmiling and unforgiving figure dates from this visit home during the conference.Heckscher, p. 538. While the general public along with editorial writers, churches and peace groups generally favored the League, the Republicans vowed to defeat the League and discredit Wilson.Heckscher, p. 539. Wilson notably did not address the Congress as to ongoing deliberations at the peace conference, as indeed his counterpart Lloyd George did with Parliament. Heckscher opines that this was a missed opportunity to forge the debate even though the Congressional majority had changed. In France he was without the usual control over his message through the media in fact, the French initiated an aggressive propaganda campaign in the midst of the Conference to affect its outcome.Heckscher, p. 541. After his visit home, and while en route back to France, Wilson suffered an illness the ensuing months brought a decline in health and in power and prestige. On arrival, it was immediately clear the conference had struggled in his absence Col. House had compromised Wilsons prior gains, and Wilson set out to attempt to regain the lost ground.Heckscher, p. 544 545. During these dark days of the conference Taft cabled to Wilson three proposed amendments to the League covenant which he thought would considerably increase its acceptability to the Europeans the right of withdrawal from the League, the exemption of domestic issues from the League and the inviolability of the Monroe Doctrine. Wilson very reluctantly accepted these amendments, explaining why he later was more inflexible in the Senate treaty negotiations.Heckscher, pp. 551 553. On April 3 Wilson fell violently ill during a conference meeting, in a narrow escape from influenza. Though his symptoms receded within a couple of days, those around him noticed a distinct, lasting deterioration.Heckscher, p. 555. The charter of the proposed League of Nations was incorporated into the conferences Treaty of Versailles.Arnold M. Rice, John A. Krout, United States History From 1865 , , p. 180. Japan proposed that the Covenant include a racial equality clause. Wilson was indifferent to the issue, but acceded to strong opposition from Australia and Britain. After the conference, Wilson said at last the world knows America as the savior of the worldPresident Woodrow Wilson speaking on the League of Nations to a luncheon audience in Portland OR. 66th Cong., 1st sess. Senate Documents Addresses of President Wilson , vol.11, no. 120, p. 206. For his peacemaking efforts, Wilson was awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize. Economist John Maynard Keynes, an antiWilson and antiLeague intellectual, asserted Wilson was not well regarded at the Conference, he was in many respects...illinformed as to European conditions...his mind was slow and unadaptable...There can seldom have been a statesman of the first rank more incompetent than the President in the agilities of the council chamber.John Maynard Keynes, The Economic Consequences of the Peace ,available online Keynes highly regarded rhetoric became the prevailing judgment of the conference for decades.Heckscher, p. 589. Treaty fight, 1919 Wilson returning from the Versailles Peace Conference, 1919. The chances were less than favorable for ratification of the treaty by a twothirds vote of the Republican Senate. Public opinion was mixed, with intense opposition from most Republicans, Germans, and Irish Catholic Democrats. In numerous meetings with Senators, Wilson discovered opposition had hardened. Despite his weakened physical condition Wilson decided to barnstorm the Western states, scheduling 29 major speeches and many short ones to rally support.A. Scott Berg, Wilson , pp. 619 34 Wilson had earlier downplayed Germanys guilt in starting the war by calling for peace without victory, but he had taken an increasingly hard stand at Paris and rejected advice to soften the treatys treatment of Germany.Marc Trachtenberg, Versailles after Sixty Years, Journal of Contemporary History 173 pp. 487 506 esp p. 490 in JSTOR In a reversal of his earlier position, in summer 1919 Wilson repeatedly stressed Germanys guilt, saying the treaty, seeks to punish one of the greatest wrongs ever done in history, the wrong which Germany sought to do to the world and to civilization and there ought to be no weak purpose with regard to the application of the punishment. She attempted an intolerable thing, and she must be made to pay for the attempt. Wilson had a series of debilitating strokes and had to cut short his trip on September 26, 1919. He became an invalid in the White House, closely monitored by his wife, who insulated him from negative news and downplayed for him the gravity of his condition.Berg, Wilson , pp. 635 43 Senator Lodge led the opposition to the treaty in the Republican controlled Senate the key point of disagreement was whether the League would diminish the power of Congress to declare war. It proved possible to build a majority for the treaty in the Senate, but the twothirds coalition needed to ratify was insurmountable.Thomas A. Bailey, Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal One block of Democrats strongly supported the Versailles Treaty a second group supported the Treaty but followed Wilson in opposing any amendments or reservations. The largest bloc Lodge and the Republicans wanted a treaty with reservations, especially on Article X, which empowered the League of Nations to make war without a vote by the United States Congress. Finally, a bipartisan group of 13 irreconcilables opposed a treaty in any form.Ralph A. Stone . The Irreconcilables The Fight Against the League of Nations . Lexington University Press of Kentucky. In midNovember 1919 Lodge and his Republicans formed a coalition with the proTreaty Democrats, and were close to a twothirds majority for a Treaty with reservations but the seriously indisposed Wilson rejected this compromise and enough Democrats followed his lead to defeat ratification. Cooper and Bailey suggest that Wilsons stroke in September had debilitated him from negotiating effectively with Lodge.Cooper, Woodrow Wilson , 544, 557 560 Bailey calls Wilsons rejection, The Supreme Infanticide, Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal p. 271. Post war 1919 1920 Wilsons administration did effectively demobilize the country at the wars end. A plan to form a commission for the purpose was abandoned in the face of Republican control the Senate, which complicated the appointment of commission members. Instead, Wilson favored the prompt dismantling of wartime boards and regulatory agencies.David M. Kennedy, Over Here The First World War and American Society pp. 249 50 Demobilization was chaotic and violent four million soldiers were sent home with little planning, little money, few benefits, and other vague promises. A wartime bubble in prices of farmland burst, leaving many farmers deeply in debt after they purchased new land. There were social tensions as veterans tried to find jobs, and existing workers struggled to protect theirs, as well as to gain better wages and conditions. Major strikes in the steel, coal, and meatpacking industries disrupted the economy in 1919.Leonard Williams Levy and Louis Fisher, eds. Encyclopedia of the American Presidency p. 494. These conditions were catalysts for outbreaks of racial animosity that erupted in serious race riots of ethnic whites against blacks in Chicago, Omaha, and two dozen other major cities in the North it was called the Red Summer of 1919. As the election of 1920 approached, Wilson momentarily imagined that a deadlocked Democratic convention might nominate him for a third term with a campaign focused on the League of Nations. No one around the President adequately clarified for him that he was too incapacitated, had insufficient support, and that the League defeat was irreversible.David Pietrusza, 1920 The Year of the Six Presidents , 191 2, 198 200, 253 In retirement, Wilson harbored hopes for a White House run in 1924 despite the absence of substantial support. Other foreign affairs Wilson frequently intervened in Latin American affairs, saying in 1913 I am going to teach the South American republics to elect good men.Paul Horgan, Great River the Rio Grande in North American History , 913 These interventions included Mexico in 1914, Haiti in 1915, the Dominican Republic in 1916, Cuba in 1917, and Panama in 1918. The U.S. maintained troops in Nicaragua throughout the Wilson administration and used them to select the president of Nicaragua and then to force Nicaragua to pass the BryanChamorro Treaty. Additionally, American troops in Haiti under the command of the federal government forced the Haitian legislature to elect as president a proWestern candidate who was favored by Wilson though less popular among the Haitian citizenry.Clements, Presidency 103 6 Wilson ordered the military occupation of the Dominican Republic shortly after the resignation of its President Juan Isidro Jimenes Pereyra in 1916. The U.S. military worked in concert with wealthy Dominican landowners to suppress the gavilleros , a campesino guerrilla force fighting the occupation. The occupation lasted until 1924, and was notorious for its brutality against those in the resistance. Wilson also negotiated a treaty with Colombia in which the U.S. apologized for its role in the Panama Revolution of 1903 1904.Cooper, Woodrow Wilson , 381 After Russia left World War I following the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, the Allies sent troops there to prevent a German or Bolshevik takeover of alliedprovided weapons, munitions and other supplies previously shipped as aid to the prerevolutionary government.George F. Kennan, Russia Leaves the War , p. 472, et passim . 1956, repr. 1989, . Wilson sent armed forces to assist the withdrawal of Czechoslovak Legions along the TransSiberian Railway, and to hold key port cities at Arkhangelsk and Vladivostok. Though specifically instructed not to engage the Bolsheviks, the U.S. forces engaged in several armed conflicts against forces of the new Russian government. Revolutionaries in Russia resented the United States intrusion. Robert Maddox wrote, The immediate effect of the intervention was to prolong a bloody civil war, thereby costing thousands of additional lives and wreaking enormous destruction on an already battered society.Robert J. Maddox, The Unknown War with Russia , 137. Wilson withdrew most of the soldiers on April 1, 1920, though some remained until as late as 1922. In 1919, Wilson guided American foreign policy to acquiesce in the Balfour Declaration without supporting Zionism in an official way. Wilson expressed sympathy for the plight of Jews, especially in Poland and France.Walworth 473 83, esp. p. 481 Melvin I. Urofsky, American Zionism from Herzl to the Holocaust , ch. 6 Frank W. Brecher, Reluctant Ally United States Foreign Policy toward the Jews from Wilson to Roosevelt. ch 1 4. In May 1920, Wilson sent a longdeferred proposal to Congress to have the U.S. accept a mandate from the League of Nations to take over Armenia.Peter Balakian . The Burning Tigris The Armenian Genocide and Americas Response . New York HarperCollins. Bailey notes this was opposed by American public opinion,Bailey, Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal pp. 295 96. while Richard G. Hovannisian states that Wilson made all the wrong arguments for the mandate and focused less on the immediate policy than on how history would judge his actions he wished to place it clearly on the record that the abandonment of Armenia was not his doing. The resolution won the votes of only 23 senators. Incapacity The immediate cause of Wilsons incapacity in September 1919 was the physical strain of the public speaking tour he undertook in support of ratification of the Treaty of Versailles. In Pueblo, Colorado, on September 25, 1919, he collapsed and never fully recovered.In 1906 Wilson first exhibited arterial hypertension, mainly untreatable at the time. Timeline for Hypertension Treatment History, accessed September 14, 2009. During his presidency, he had repeated episodes of unexplained arm and hand weakness, and his retinal arteries were said to be abnormal on fundoscopic examination.The Health Medical History of President Woodrow Wilson, Doctor Zebra website, accessed November 9, 2009. He developed severe headaches, diplopia , and evanescent weakness of the left arm and leg. In retrospect, physicians have said that those problems likely represented the effects of cerebral transient ischemic attacks. Weinstein EA, Woodrow Wilson A Medical Psychological Biography , pp. 260 270 On October 2, 1919, he suffered a serious stroke, leaving him paralyzed on his left side, along with blindness in his left eye and with only partial vision in the right eye.Heckscher, pp. 615 622. He was confined to bed for several weeks and sequestered from everyone except his wife and physician, Dr. Cary Grayson.C.T. Grayson, Woodrow Wilson An Intimate Memoir . NY Holt, Rhinehart, Winston, 1960. pp. 96 110 For some months, Wilson used a wheelchair and later he required use of a cane. His wife and aide Joe Tumulty were said to have helped a journalist, Louis Seibold, present a false account of an interview with the President. He was insulated by his wife, who selected matters for his attention and delegated others to his cabinet. Wilson temporarily resumed a perfunctory attendance at cabinet meetings.Herbert Hoover, The Ordeal of Woodrow Wilson . Johns Hopkins University Press, 1958. pp. 271 278 By February 1920, the Presidents true condition was publicly known. At issue was Wilsons fitness for the presidency at a time when the League fight was reaching a climax, and domestic issues such as strikes, unemployment, inflation and the threat of Communism were ablaze. No one close to him, including his wife, his physician, or personal assistant, was willing to admit he was unable to perform the duties of the presidency.Cooper, Wilson p. 555 Because of this complex case, and the subsequent realization of the difficulties that might have been experienced in the nuclear age if, instead of being assassinated in 1963, John F. Kennedy had been left in a permanent vegetative state on account of his brain injuries, the 25th Amendment was ratified in 1967 to allow the voluntary or forcible replacement of an unable or unwilling incumbent.Birch Bayh, One Heartbeat Away Presidential Disability . Prohibition Prohibition developed as an unstoppable reform during the war, but Wilson played a minor role in its passage. A combination of the temperance movement, hatred of everything German , and activism by churches and women led to ratification of an amendment to achieve Prohibition in the United States. A Constitutional amendment passed both houses in December 1917 by 23 votes. By January 16, 1919, the Eighteenth Amendment had been ratified by 36 of the 48 states it needed. On October 28, 1919, Congress passed enabling legislation, the National Prohibition Act , to enforce the Eighteenth Amendment. Wilson felt Prohibition was unenforceable, but his veto of the Volstead Act was overridden by Congress.See website Prohibition began on January 16, 1920 the manufacture, importation, sale, and transport of alcohol were prohibited, except for limited cases such as religious purposes . But, the consumption of alcohol was never prohibited, and individuals could maintain a private stock that existed before Prohibition went into effect. Wilson moved his private supply of alcoholic beverages to the wine cellar of his Washington residence after his term of office ended. Wilsons position that nationwide Prohibition was unenforceable came to pass as a black market quickly developed to evade restrictions, and considerable liquor was both manufactured and smuggled into the country. Speakeasies thrived in cities, towns and rural areas. Womens suffrage Wilson favored womens suffrage at the state level, but held off support for a nationwide constitutional amendment because his party was sharply divided. The white South was the main center of oppositiononly Arkansas gave women voting rights. From 1917 to 1919, a highly visible campaign by the National Womans Party disparaged Wilson and his party for not enacting any amendment on the matter. Wilson did keep in close touch with the much larger and more moderate suffragists of the National American Woman Suffrage Association. He continued to hold off until he was sure the Democratic Party in the North was supportive the 1917 referendum in New York State in favor of suffrage proved decisive for him and he now came out strongly in support of national suffrage in a January 1918 speech to Congress. Applauding the vitality of women during the First World War, he asked Congress, We have made partners of the women in this war Shall we admit them only to a partnership of suffering and sacrifice and toil and not to a partnership of privilege and right The House passed a constitutional amendment, but it stalled in the Senate.Christine A. Lunardini and Thomas J. Knock, Woodrow Wilson and woman suffrage A new look, Political Science Quarterly pp. 655 671. . Wilson continued to speak in its defense, consulting with members of Congress through personal and written appeals, often on his own initiative. Then on June 4, 1919, the proposed amendment prohibiting the states and the federal government from denying the right to vote to citizens of the United States on the basis of sex, was approved, and submitted it to the state legislatures for ratification. It was ratified by the requisite 36 states thanks to Tennessee, and on August 18, 1920, the measure became the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Post war economic depression According to historian Adam Tooze, Wilsons presidency came to a calamitous endThe Deluge The Great War and the Remaking of Global Order 1916 1931 with an economic depression. Christina Romer that wrote that data from the NBER shows that the depression lasted 18 months.US Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions , National Bureau of Economic Research Administration and Cabinet Wilsons chief of staff was Joseph Patrick Tumulty from 1913 to 1921, but he was largely upstaged after 1916 when Wilsons second wife, Edith Bolling Galt Wilson, assumed full control of Wilsons schedule. The most important foreign policy advisor and confidant was Colonel Edward M. House until Wilson broke with him in early 1919, for his missteps at the peace conference in Wilsons absence.Arthur Walworth, Considerations on Woodrow Wilson and Edward M. House, Presidential Studies Quarterly 1994 24 79 86. Woodrow Wilson and his cabinet in the Cabinet Room Judicial appointments Justice Louis Brandeis Supreme Court Wilson appointed three Associate Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States James Clark McReynolds in 1914. A conservative, he served more than 26 years and opposed the New Deal. Louis Dembitz Brandeis in 1916. A liberal, and the first Jew appointed to the Court, he served 22 years and wrote landmark opinions on free speech and right to privacy. John Hessin Clarke in 1916. He served just 6 years on the Court before resigning. He thoroughly disliked his work as an Associate Justice. Other courts Along with his Supreme Court appointments, Wilson appointed 20 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals and 52 judges to the United States district courts. Final years and death The final resting place of Woodrow Wilson at the Washington National Cathedral After the end of his second term in 1921, Wilson and his wife moved from the White House to an elegant 1915 town house in the Embassy Row section of Washington, D.C. Wilson continued daily drives, and attended Keiths vaudeville theatre on Saturday nights. Wilson was one of only two U.S. Presidents to have served as president of the American Historical Association.David Henry Burton. Theodore Roosevelt, American Politician , p. 146. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1997, In 1921, Wilson opened a law office with former Secretary of State Bainbridge Colby, but Wilsons second attempt at practicing law proved no more enjoyable than his first, and the practice was closed by the end of 1922. Wilson experienced more success with his return to writing, and he published short works on the international impact of the American Revolution and the rise of totalitarianism. He also campaigned for Democratic candidates in the 1922 elections, and he hinted to friends that he might pursue a third term in the 1924 presidential election. In August 1923, he attended the funeral of his successor, Warren G. Harding.Cooper , pp. 581 590 On November 10, 1923, Wilson made a short Armistice Day radio speech from the library of his home, his last national address. The following day he spoke briefly from the front steps to more than 20,000 well wishers gathered outside the house. On February 3, 1924, Wilson died at home of a stroke and other heartrelated problems at age 67. He was interred in a sarcophagus in Washington National Cathedral and is the only president interred in the nations capital.John Whitcomb, Claire Whitcomb. Real Life at the White House , p. 262. Routledge, 2002, Mrs. Wilson stayed in the home another 37 years, dying there at age 89 on December 28, 1961, which was Woodrows birthday and the day she was to be the guest of honor at the opening of the Woodrow Wilson Bridge across the Potomac River near Washington. Mrs. Wilson left the home and much of the contents to the National Trust for Historic Preservation to be made into a museum honoring her husband. The Woodrow Wilson House opened to the public in 1963, was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1964, and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1966.See Woodrow Wilson House, National Park Service Website, accessed January 12, 2009 Wilson left his daughter Margaret an annuity of 2,500 annually for as long as she remained unmarried, and left to his daughters what had been his first wifes personal property. The rest he left to Edith as a life estate with the provision that at her death, his daughters would divide the estate among themselves. Wills of the U.S. Presidents , edited by Herbert R Collins and David B Weaver 176 177, . Wilsons presidential papers and his personal library are at the Library of Congress. Race relations Quotation from Woodrow Wilsons History of the American People as reproduced in the film The Birth of a Nation Several historians have spotlighted consistent examples in the public record of Wilsons overtly racist policies and political appointments, such as segregationists he placed in his cabinet. According to scholars, Wilson believed that slavery was wrong on economic labor grounds, rather than for moral reasons. They also argue that he idealized the slavery system in the South, viewing masters as patient with indolent slaves. In terms of Reconstruction, Wilson held the common southern view that the South was demoralized by Northern carpetbaggers and that overreach on the part of the Radical Republicans justified extreme measures to reassert Democratic national and state governments.Gerstle, p. 104 WWI draft card,the lower left corner to be removed by men of African background to help keep military segregated While president of Princeton University, Wilson had discouraged blacks from applying for admission, preferring to keep the peace among white students and alumni.Arthur Link, Wilson The Road to the White House 502 Wilsons History of the American People dismissed lynchings committed by the Ku Klux Klan of the late 1860s as a lawless reaction to a lawless period. The President defended them, writing that Klan began to attempt by intimidation what they were not allowed to attempt by the ballot or by any ordered course of public action. Wilsons War Department drafted hundreds of thousands of blacks into the army, giving them equal pay with whites, but in accord with military policy from the Civil War through the Second World War, kept them in allblack units with white officers, and kept the great majority out of combat.James J. Cooke, The AllAmericans at War The 82nd Division in the Great War, 1917 1918 When a delegation of blacks protested the discriminatory actions, Wilson told them segregation is not a humiliation but a benefit, and ought to be so regarded by you gentlemen. In 1918, W. E. B. Du Bois a leader of the NAACP who had campaigned for Wilson believing he was a liberal southerner was offered an Army commission in charge of dealing with race relations DuBois accepted, but he failed his Army physical and did not serve.Mark Ellis, Closing Ranks and Seeking Honors W.E.B. Du Bois in World War I Journal of American History , 1992 79 96 124. By 1916, Du Bois opposed Wilson, charging that his first term had seen the worst attempt at Jim Crow legislation and discrimination in civil service that blacks had experienced since the Civil War. Cabinet heads appointed by President Wilson resegregated restrooms and cafeterias in their buildings. During Wilsons presidency, the film The Birth of a Nation became the first motion picture to be in screened in the White House. The film, while revolutionary in its cinematic technique, glorified the Ku Klux Klan and portrayed blacks as uncouth and uncivilized. After seeing the film, Wilson felt betrayed by his old friend Thomas Dixon Jr., who wrote two books the movie was based on, and did not like or endorse the film he tried to stop its showing during the World War.Arthur Link, Wilson The New Freedom 225354. Biographer Cooper rejects the claim first made in 1937 by a magazine writer who said that Wilson remarked It is like writing history with lightning, and my only regret is that it is all so terribly true an eye witness reports that Wilson said nothing.Stokes p 111.John Milton Cooper, Woodrow Wilson p 272. During Wilsons term, segregation was ordered in the Washington offices of the Navy, the Treasury, and the Postmaster General. Then suddenly, photographs became required for all new federal job applicants. After black leaders pressed him, President Wilson explained he was trying to reduce friction, and that he sincerely believed it to be in their interest. Under Wilson, racial segregation was quickly implemented at the Post Office Department. Many African American employees were downgraded and even fired. Employees who were downgraded were transferred to the dead letter office, where they did not interact with the public. The few African Americans who remained at the main post offices were put to work behind screens, out of customers sight. Memorials Wilsons Pierce Arrow on display in Staunton, Virginia The largest denomination of U.S. currency ever printed, the 100,000 bill bears Wilsons portrait . The Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs was founded at Princeton in 1930. It was created in the spirit of Wilsons interest in preparing students for leadership in public and international affairs. Shadow Lawn, the Summer White House for Wilson during his term in office, became part of Monmouth University in 1956. The college has placed a marker on the building, renamed Woodrow Wilson Hall, commemorating the home. It was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1985. In 1944, Darryl F. Zanuck of 20th Century Fox produced a film titled Wilson . It looked back with nostalgia to Wilsons presidency, especially concerning his role as commanderinchief during World War I. A section of the Rambla of Montevideo, Uruguay, is named Rambla Presidente Wilson. A street in the 16th arrondissement in Paris, running from Trocadro to the Place de lAlma, is named the Avenue du Prsident Wilson. The Pont Wilson crosses the Rhne river in the center of Lyon, France. The Boulevard du Prsident Wilson extends from the main train station of Strasbourg and connects to the Boulevard Clemenceau. In Bordeaux, the Boulevard du Prsident Wilson links to the Boulevard George V. The Quai du Prsident Wilson forms part of the port of Marseille. Praha hlavn ndra, the main railway station of Prague has, for much of its history, been known as the Wilson Station , and features the Woodrow Wilson Monument. The in Ghent, Belgium. In 2010, Wilson was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame. One year after Wilsons death the U.S. Post Office issued the first postage stamp honoring the late president. Since then, four more stamps were issued in Wilsons honor, the last being issued in 1998.Smithsonian National Postal Museum17cent Wilson FileWoodrow Wilson postage stamp issues.jpegthumb484pxcenterWoodrow Wilson stamp issues17c issued in 1925 1 issued in 1938 7c issued in 1956.Smithsonian National Postal Museum17cent Wilson1dollar Wilson7cent Wilson Works Woodrow Wilson was also an accomplished author and scholar, having written numerous books and essays. Books Congressional Government , 1885. George Washington, 1896. On Being Human , 1897. The State Elements of Historical and Practical Politics , 1898. A History of the American People , 1902. volume Ivolume IIvolume IIIvolume IVvolume V. Constitutional Government in the United States , 1908. The New Freedom , 1913. When A Man Comes To Himself , 1915. Essays The Study of Administration , 1887. Leaders of Men , 1890. Media FileWoodrow Wilson at a parade, 1918.ogvWilson tips his hat as he exits the White House on his way to a parade along Pennsylvania Avenue . FileWoodrow Wilson video montage.oggCollection of video clips of the president See also Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home Woodrow Wilson House Woodrow Wilson Foundation Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars Progressivism in the United States Silent Sentinels White House Records Office Notes Bibliography Biographical Berg, A. Scott. Wilson , fullscale scholarly biography Blum, John. Woodrow Wilson and the Politics of Morality short scholarly biography Brands, H. W. Woodrow Wilson 1913 1921 short scholarly biography Cooper, John Milton. Woodrow Wilson A Biography , fullscale scholarly biography Link, Arthur S. Woodrow Wilson in Henry F. Graff ed., The presidents A Reference History pp.365 388 short scholarly biography Link, Arthur Stanley. Wilson The Road to the White House , first volume of standard biography Wilson The New Freedom Wilson The Struggle for Neutrality 1914 1915 Wilson Confusions and Crises 1915 1916 Wilson Campaigns for Progressivism and Peace 1916 1917 , the last volume of standard scholarly biography Maynard, W. Barksdale. Woodrow Wilson Princeton to the Presidency Miller, Kristie. Ellen and Edith Woodrow Wilsons First Ladies Post, Jerrold M. Woodrow Wilson ReExamined The MindBody Controversy Redux and Other Disputations, Political Psychology 42 pp.289 306 in JSTOR, on Wilsons selfdefeating behavior full scale scholarly biography Scholarly topical studies Ambrosius, Lloyd E. Woodrow Wilson and George W. Bush Historical Comparisons of Ends and Means in Their Foreign Policies, Diplomatic History , 30 , 509 43. Ambrosius, Lloyd E. Woodrow Wilson and American Internationalism xii, 270 pp. Bailey Thomas A. Wilson and the Peacemakers Combining Woodrow Wilson and the Lost Peace and Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal detailed coverage of 1919 Lost Peace online deals with negotiations in Paris Great Betrayal online deals with battle in Washington Clements, Kendrick, A. Woodrow Wilson World Statesman Clements, Kendrick A. The Presidency of Woodrow Wilson , a standard scholarly survey Clements, Kendrick A. Woodrow Wilson and World War I, Presidential Studies Quarterly 341 . pp.62 Cooper, John Milton, ed. Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace Cooper, John Milton. Making A Case for Wilson, in Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson ch 1 Davis, Donald E. and Eugene P. Trani. The First Cold War The Legacy of Woodrow Wilson in U.S.Soviet Relations online Greene, Theodore P., ed. Wilson at Versailles essays by scholars and primary sources Hofstadter, Richard. Woodrow Wilson The Conservative as Liberal in The American Political Tradition , ch. 10. Janis, Mark Weston. How Wilsonian Was Woodrow Wilson, Dartmouth Law Journal 51 pp.1 15 online Kazianis, Harry. Woodrow Wilson Civil War, Morality and Foreign Policy, EInternational Relations , Eir.info Kennedy, Ross A., ed. A Companion to Woodrow Wilson , historiographical essays by scholars Knock, Thomas J. To End All Wars Woodrow Wilson and the Quest for a New World Order Levin, Jr., N. Gordon. Woodrow Wilson and World Politics Americas Response to War and Revolution Link, Arthur S. Woodrow Wilson and the Progressive Era, 1910 1917 standard political history of the era online Link, Arthur S. Wilson the Diplomatist A Look at His Major Foreign Policies online Link, Arthur S. Woodrow Wilson and a Revolutionary World, 1913 1921 Livermore, Seward W. Woodrow Wilson and the War Congress, 1916 1918 Malin, James C. The United States after the World War online Saunders, Robert M. In Search of Woodrow Wilson Beliefs and Behavior Trani, Eugene P. Woodrow Wilson and the Decision to Intervene in Russia A Reconsideration. Journal of Modern History . 48440 61. in JSTOR Tucker, Robert W. Woodrow Wilson and the Great War Reconsidering Americas Neutrality, 1914 1917 Vought, Hans. Woodrow Wilson, Ethnicity, and the Myth of American Unity. In Myth America A Historical Anthology, Volume II . 1997. Gerster, Patrick, and Cords, Nicholas. Brandywine Press, St. James, NY. Walworth, Arthur Wilson and His Peacemakers American Diplomacy at the Paris Peace Conference, 1919 Yellin, Eric S. Racism in the Nations Service Government Workers and the Color Line in Woodrow Wilsons America Primary sources August Heckscher, ed., The Politics of Woodrow Wilson Selections from his Speeches and Writings 69 volumes. Annotated edition of all of Wilsons correspondence, speeches and writings. . Memoir by Wilsons chief of staff. Arno Press reprint 1981. Wilson, Woodrow. Congressional government a study in American politics 1912 campaign speeches 3 volumes, 1918 and later editions. Woodrow Wilson, compiled with his approval by Hamilton Foley Woodrow Wilsons Case for the League of Nations , Princeton University Press, Princeton 1923 contemporary book review Wilson, Woodrow. Messages Papers of Woodrow Wilson 2 vol Wilson, Woodrow. The New Democracy. Presidential Messages, Addresses, and Other Papers 2 vol 1926, Wilson, Woodrow. President Woodrow Wilsons Fourteen Points Wilson, Woodrow. Presidential papers and personal library, Woodrow Wilson Library of the Library of Congress. External links Official Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library Museum White House biography Speeches and other works Full text of a number of Wilsons speeches, Miller Center of Public Affairs Woodrow Wilson Personal Manuscripts Media coverage Life Portrait of Woodrow Wilson, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , September 13, 1999 Study sites Woodrow Wilson A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Extensive essays on Woodrow Wilson and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Woodrow Wilson Links Woodrow Wilson Prophet of Peace, a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places lesson plan Category1856 births Category1924 deaths Category19thcentury American people Category19thcentury Presbyterians Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury Presbyterians CategoryAmerican Nobel laureates CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryAmerican people of Scottish descent CategoryAmerican people of World War I CategoryAmerican politicians with physical disabilities CategoryAmerican Presbyterians CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryBryn Mawr College faculty CategoryBurials at Washington National Cathedral CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party state governors of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryFellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences CategoryFreemen of the City of London CategoryGovernors of New Jersey CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHistory of racial segregation in the United States CategoryJohns Hopkins University alumni CategoryLeague of Nations people CategoryMembers of the American Philosophical Society CategoryNew Jersey Democrats CategoryNew Jersey gubernatorial candidates CategoryNobel Peace Prize laureates CategoryPeople from Augusta, Georgia CategoryPoliticians from Staunton, Virginia CategoryPeople of the Russian Civil War CategoryPresidency of Woodrow Wilson CategoryPresidents of Princeton University CategoryPresidents of the American Historical Association CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryPrinceton University alumni CategoryPrinceton University faculty CategoryProgressive Era in the United States CategoryStroke survivors CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1912 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1916 CategoryUniversity of Virginia faculty CategoryWesleyan Cardinals football coaches CategoryWesleyan University faculty CategoryCentury Association members CategoryPeople from Staunton,Virginia
James Abram Garfield was the 20th President of the United States, serving from March 4, 1881, until his assassination later that year. Garfield had served nine terms in the House of Representatives, and had been elected to the Senate before his candidacy for the White House, though he declined the Senate seat once he was elected President. He is the only sitting House member to be elected president. Garfield was raised by his widowed mother in humble circumstances on an Ohio farm. He worked at various jobs, including on a canal boat, in his youth. Beginning at age 17, he attended several Ohio schools, then studied at Williams College in Williamstown, Massachusetts, graduating in 1856. A year later, Garfield entered politics as a Republican. He married Lucretia Rudolph in 1858, and served as a member of the Ohio State Senate . Garfield opposed Confederate secession, served as a major general in the Union Army during the American Civil War, and fought in the battles of Middle Creek, Shiloh, and Chickamauga. He was first elected to Congress in 1862 to represent Ohios 19th District. Throughout Garfields extended congressional service after the Civil War, he firmly supported the gold standard and gained a reputation as a skilled orator. Garfield initially agreed with Radical Republican views regarding Reconstruction, but later favored a moderate approach for civil rights enforcement for freedmen. At the 1880 Republican National Convention, Senatorelect Garfield attended as campaign manager for Secretary of the Treasury John Sherman, and gave the presidential nomination speech for him. When neither Sherman nor his rivals Ulysses S. Grant and James G. Blaine could get enough votes to secure the nomination, delegates chose Garfield as a compromise on the 36th ballot. In the 1880 presidential election, Garfield conducted a lowkey front porch campaign, and narrowly defeated Democrat Winfield Scott Hancock. Garfields accomplishments as president included a resurgence of presidential authority against senatorial courtesy in executive appointments, energizing American naval power, and purging corruption in the Post Office, all during his extremely short time in office. Garfield made notable diplomatic and judiciary appointments, including a U.S. Supreme Court justice. He enhanced the powers of the presidency when he defied the powerful New York senator Roscoe Conkling by appointing William H. Robertson to the lucrative post of Collector of the Port of New York, starting a fracas that ended with Robertsons confirmation and Conklings resignation from the Senate. Garfield advocated agricultural technology, an educated electorate, and civil rights for African Americans. He also proposed substantial civil service reform, eventually passed by Congress in 1883 and signed into law by his successor, Chester A. Arthur, as the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act. On July 2, 1881, he was shot at the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station in Washington D.C. by Charles J. Guiteau, a lawyer and writer with a grievance. The wound was not immediately fatal for Garfield, but his doctors uncleaned and unprotected hands are said to have led to infection that caused his death on September 19. Guiteau was convicted of the murder and was executed in June 1882 he tried to name his crime as simple assault by blaming the doctors for Garfields death. With his term cut short by his death after only 200 days, and much of it spent in ill health trying to recover from the attack, Garfield is littleremembered for other than his assassination. Historians often forgo listing him in rankings of U.S. presidents due to the short length of his presidency. Childhood Replica of the log cabin where Garfield was born James Garfield was born the youngest of five children on November 19, 1831, in a log cabin in Orange Township, now Moreland Hills, Ohio. Orange Township had been in the Western Reserve until 1800, and like many who settled there, Garfields ancestors were from New England, his ancestor, Edward Garfield immigrating from Hillmorton, Warwickshire, England, to Massachusetts in around 1630. James father Abram had been born in Worcester, New York, and came to Ohio to woo his childhood sweetheart, Mehitabel Ballou, only to find her married. He instead wed her sister Eliza, who had been born in New Hampshire. James was named for an older brother, dead in infancy. In early 1833, Abram and Eliza Garfield joined the Church of Christ, a decision that would help shape their youngest sons life. Abram Garfield died later that year his son was raised in poverty in a household led by the strongwilled Eliza. James was her favorite child, and the two remained close for the rest of his life. Eliza Garfield remarried in 1842, but soon left her second husband, Warren Belden , and a thenscandalous divorce was awarded against her in 1850. James took his mothers side and when Belden died in 1880, noted the fact in his diary with satisfaction. Garfield enjoyed his mothers stories about his ancestry, especially his Welsh greatgreatgrandfathers and his ancestor who served as a knight of Caerffili Castle. Poor and fatherless, Garfield was mocked by his fellow boys, and throughout his life was very sensitive to slights. He escaped through reading, devouring all the books he could find. He left home at age 16 in 1847. Rejected by the only ship in port in Cleveland, Garfield instead found work on a canal boat, responsible for managing the mules that pulled it. This labor would be used to good effect by Horatio Alger, who penned Garfields campaign biography in 1880. After six weeks, illness forced Garfield to return home and, during his recuperation, his mother and a local education official got him to promise to postpone his return to the canals for a year and go to school. Accordingly, in 1848, he began at Geauga Seminary, in nearby Chester Township. Garfield later said of his childhood, I lament that I was born to poverty, and in this chaos of childhood, seventeen years passed before I caught any inspiration... a precious 17 years when a boy with a father and some wealth might have become fixed in manly ways. Education, marriage and early career Garfield at age 16 At Geauga Academy, which he attended from 1848 to 1850, Garfield learned academic subjects he had not previously had time for. He shone as a student, and was especially interested in languages and elocution. He began to appreciate the power a speaker had over an audience, writing that the speakers platform creates some excitement. I love agitation and investigation and glory in defending unpopular truth against popular error. Geauga was coeducational, and Garfield was attracted to one of his fellow students, Lucretia Rudolph, whom he later married. To support himself at Geauga, he worked as a carpenters assistant and as a teacher. The need to go from town to town to find a place as a teacher disgusted Garfield, and he thereafter developed a dislike of what he called placeseeking, which became, he said, the law of my life. In later years, he would astound his friends by letting positions pass that could have been his with a little politicking. Garfield had attended church more to please his mother than to worship God, but in his late teens underwent a religious awakening, and attended many camp meetings, at one of which he was born again. The next day, March 4, 1850, he was baptized into the Disciples by being submerged in the icy waters of the Chagrin River. Lucretia Garfield in the 1870s After leaving Geauga, Garfield worked for a year at various jobs, including teaching. Finding that some New Englanders worked their way through college, Garfield determined to do the same, and first sought a school that could prepare him for the entrance examinations. From 1851 to 1854, he attended the Western Reserve Eclectic Institute in Hiram, Ohio, a school run by the Disciples. While there, he was most interested in the study of Greek and Latin, but was inclined to learn about and discuss any new thing he encountered. Securing a position on entry as janitor, he was hired to teach while still a student. Lucretia Rudolph had also enrolled at the Institute, and Garfield wooed her while teaching her Greek. He developed a regular preaching circuit at neighboring churches, in some cases earning a gold dollar per service. By 1854, Garfield had learned all the Institute could teach him and was a fulltime teacher. Garfield then enrolled at Williams College in Williamstown, Massachusetts, as a thirdyear student, given credit for two years study at the Institute after passing a cursory examination. Garfield was impressed with the college president, Mark Hopkins, who had responded warmly to Garfields letter inquiring about admission. He said of Hopkins, The ideal college is Mark Hopkins on one end of a log with a student on the other. Hopkins later stated about Garfield in his student days, There was a large general capacity applicable to any subject. There was no pretense of genius, or alternation of spasmodic effort, but a satisfactory accomplishment in all directions. After his first term, Garfield was hired to teach penmanship to the students of nearby Pownal, Vermont, a post whose previous incumbent was Chester A. Arthur. Garfield graduated from Williams in August 1856 as salutatorian, giving an address at the commencement. Garfield biographer Ira Rutkow pointed out that the future presidents years at Williams gave Garfield the opportunity to know and respect those of different social backgrounds, and despite his origin as an unsophisticated Westerner, he was liked and respected by socially conscious New Englanders. In short, as Rutkow later wrote, Garfield had an extensive and positive first experience with the world outside the Western Reserve of Ohio. On his return to Ohio, the degree from a prestigious Eastern school made Garfield a man of distinction. He returned to Hiram to teach at the Institute, and in 1857 was made its president. He did not see education as a field that would realize his full potential. At Williams, he had become more politically aware in the intensely antislavery atmosphere of the Massachusetts school, and began to consider politics as a career. In 1858, he married Lucretia they would have seven children, five of whom survived infancy. Soon after the wedding, he formally entered his name to read law at a Cleveland firm, although he did his studying in Hiram. He was admitted to the bar in 1861. Local Republican Party leaders invited Garfield to enter politics upon the death of Cyrus Prentiss, the presumptive nominee for the local state senate seat. He was nominated by the party convention on the sixth ballot, and was elected, serving until 1861. Garfields major effort in the state senate was a bill providing for Ohios first geological survey to measure its mineral resources, though it failed. Civil War Garfield as a brigadier general during the Civil War After Abraham Lincolns election as president, several Southern states announced their secession from the Union to form a new government, the Confederate States of America. Garfield read military texts while anxiously awaiting the war effort, which he regarded as a holy crusade against the Slave Power. In April 1861, the rebels bombarded Fort Sumter, one of the last federal outposts in the South, beginning the Civil War. Although he had no military training, Garfield knew that his place was in the Union Army. At Governor William Dennisons request, Garfield deferred his military ambitions to remain in the legislature, where he helped appropriate the funds to raise and equip Ohios volunteer regiments. Afterward, the legislature adjourned and Garfield spent the spring and early summer on a speaking tour of northeastern Ohio, encouraging enlistment in the new regiments. Following a trip to Illinois to purchase muskets, Garfield returned to Ohio and, in August 1861, received a commission as a colonel in the 42nd Ohio Infantry regiment. The 42nd Ohio existed only on paper, so Garfields first task was to fill its ranks. He did so quickly, recruiting many of his neighbors and former students. The regiment traveled to Camp Chase, outside Columbus, Ohio, to complete training. In December, Garfield was ordered to bring the 42nd to Kentucky, where they joined the Army of the Ohio under Brigadier General Don Carlos Buell. Buells command Buell quickly assigned Garfield the task of driving Confederate forces out of eastern Kentucky, giving him the 18th Brigade for the campaign, which, besides his own 42nd, included the 40th Ohio Infantry, two Kentucky infantry regiments and two cavalry units. They departed Catlettsburg, Kentucky, in midDecember, advancing through the valley of the Big Sandy River. The march was uneventful until Union forces reached Paintsville, Kentucky, on January 6, 1862, where Garfields cavalry engaged the rebels at Jennys Creek. Confederate troops under Brigadier General Humphrey Marshall held the town in numbers roughly equal to Garfields own, but Garfield positioned his troops so as to deceive Marshall into believing that rebel forces were outnumbered. Marshall ordered his troops to withdraw to the forks of Middle Creek, on the road to Virginia Garfield ordered his troops to pursue the Confederates. They attacked the rebel positions on January 9, 1862, in the Battle of Middle Creek, the only pitched battle Garfield personally commanded. At the end of the fighting, the Confederates withdrew from the field, and Garfield sent his troops to Prestonsburg to reprovision. Middle Creek battlefield Garfield commanded from the distant hill in the center of the photo. In recognition of his success, Garfield was promoted to brigadier general, at the age of 30. After Marshalls retreat, Garfields command was the sole remaining Union force in eastern Kentucky, and he announced that any men who had fought for the Confederacy would be granted amnesty if they returned to their homes and lived peaceably and remained loyal to the Union. The proclamation was surprisingly lenient, as Garfield now believed the war was a crusade for eradication of slavery. Following a brief skirmish at Pound Gap, the last rebel units in the area were outflanked, and they retreated to Virginia. Garfields promotion gave him command of the 20th Brigade of the Army of the Ohio, which was ordered in early 1862 to join Major General Ulysses S. Grants forces as they advanced on Corinth, Mississippi. Before the 20th Brigade arrived, however, Confederate forces under General Albert Sidney Johnston surprised Grants men in their camps, driving them back. Garfields troops got word of the battle and advanced quickly, joining the rest of the army on the second day to drive the Confederates back across the field and into retreat. The action, later known as the Battle of Shiloh, was the bloodiest of the war to date Garfield was exposed to fire for much of the day, but emerged uninjured. Major General Henry W. Halleck, Grants superior, took charge of the combined armies and advanced ponderously toward Corinth when they arrived, the Confederates had fled. That summer Garfield suffered from jaundice and significant weight loss. He was forced to return home, where his wife nursed him back to health. While he was home, Garfields friends worked to gain him the Republican nomination for Congress, although he refused to politick with the delegates. He returned to military duty that autumn and went to Washington to await his next assignment. During this period of idleness, a rumor of an extramarital affair caused friction in the Garfield marriage until Lucretia eventually chose to overlook it. Garfield repeatedly received tentative assignments that were quickly withdrawn, to his frustration. In the meantime, he served on the courtmartial of Fitz John Porter for his tardiness at the Second Battle of Bull Run. He was convinced of Porters guilt, and voted with his fellow generals to convict. The trial lasted almost two months, from November 1862 to January 1863, and by the end of it, Garfield had at last procured an assignment as Chief of Staff to Major General William S. Rosecrans. Chief of staff for Rosecrans General William S. Rosecrans The position of Chief of Staff for a general was usually held by a more junior officer, but Garfields influence with Rosecrans was greater than usual, with duties extending beyond mere communication of orders to duties that involved actual management of his Army of the Cumberland. Rosecrans had a voracious appetite for conversation, especially when he was unable to sleep in Garfield, he found the first well read person in the Army and the ideal candidate for discussions that ran deep into the night. The two became close in spite of Garfields being twelve years junior to Rosecrans, and their talks covered all topics, especially religion Rosecrans, who had converted from Methodism to Roman Catholicism, succeeded in softening Garfields view of his faith. Garfield recommended that Rosecrans replace wing commanders Alexander McCook and Thomas Crittenden, whom he believed ineffective, but Rosecrans ignored the suggestions. With Rosecrans, Garfield devised the Tullahoma Campaign to pursue and trap Confederate General Braxton Bragg in Tullahoma. After initial Union success, Bragg retreated toward Chattanooga, where Rosecrans stalled and requested more troops and supplies. Garfield argued for an immediate advance, in line with demands from Halleck and Lincoln. After a council of war and lengthy deliberations, Rosecrans agreed to attack. At the ensuing Battle of Chickamauga on September 19 and 20, 1863, confusion among the wing commanders over Rosecranss orders created a gap in the lines, resulting in a rout of the right flank. Rosecrans concluded that the battle was lost and fell back on Chattanooga to establish a defensive line. Garfield, however, thought that part of the army had held and, with Rosecranss approval, headed across Missionary Ridge to survey the scene. Garfields hunch was correct. His ride became legendary, while Rosecrans error reignited criticism about his leadership. While Rosecranss army had avoided disaster, they were stranded in Chattanooga, surrounded by Braggs army. Garfield sent a telegram to Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton alerting Washington to the need for reinforcements to avoid annihilation, and Lincoln and Halleck delivered 20,000 troops by rail within nine days. In the meantime, Grant was promoted to command of the western armies, and quickly replaced Rosecrans with George H. Thomas. Garfield was ordered to report to Washington, where he was promoted to major general, a commission he would resign before taking a seat in the House of Representatives. According to historian Jean Edward Smith, Grant and Garfield had a guarded relationship, since Grant promoted Thomas to command of the Army of the Cumberland, rather than Garfield, after Rosecrans was dismissed. Congressional career Election in 1862 Civil War years Salmon P. Chase was Garfields ally until Andrew Johnsons impeachment trial. While serving in the army in early 1862, Garfield was approached by friends about running for Congress from Ohios newly redrawn, heavily Republican 19th district. He was worried that he and other stateappointed generals would get obscure assignments, and running for Congress would allow him to resume his political career. The fact that the new Congress would not hold its first regular session until December 1863 would allow him to continue his war service for a time. Home on medical leave, he refused to campaign for the nomination, leaving that to political managers who secured it at the local convention in September 1862, on the eighth ballot. In October, he defeated D.B. Woods by a twotoone margin in the general election for a seat in the 38th Congress. Soon after the nomination, Garfield was ordered to report to War Secretary Edwin Stanton in Washington to discuss his military future. There, Garfield met Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase, who befriended him, seeing him as a younger version of himself. The two men agreed politically, and both were part of the Radical wing of the Republican Party. Once he took his seat in December 1863, Garfield was frustrated that Lincoln seemed reluctant to press the South hard. Many radicals, led in the House by Pennsylvanias Thaddeus Stevens, wanted rebelowned lands confiscated, but Lincoln threatened to veto any bill that would do that on a widespread basis. Garfield, in debate on the House floor, supported such legislation and, discussing Englands Glorious Revolution, hinted that Lincoln might be thrown out of office for resisting the bills. Although Garfield had supported Lincolns Emancipation Proclamation, the congressman marveled that it was a ...strange phenomenon in the worlds history, when a secondrate Illinois lawyer is the instrument to utter words which shall form an epoch memorable in all future ages. Garfield not only favored abolition of slavery, but believed that the leaders of the rebellion had forfeited their constitutional rights. He supported the confiscation of southern plantations and even exile or execution of rebellion leaders as a means to ensure the permanent destruction of slavery. Garfield felt Congress was obliged to determine what legislation is necessary to secure equal justice to all loyal persons, without regard to color. Garfield was more supportive of Lincoln when Lincoln took action against slavery. Early in his tenure, he differed from his party on several issues his was the solitary Republican vote to terminate the use of bounties in recruiting. Some financially able recruits had used the bounty system to buy their way out of service , which Garfield considered reprehensible. Garfield gave a speech pointing out the flaws in the existing conscription law that of 300,000 called upon to enlist, barely 10,000 had, the remainder claiming exemption or providing money or a substitute. Lincoln appeared before the Military Affairs committee on which Garfield served, demanding a more effective bill even if it cost him reelection, Lincoln was confident he could win the war before his term expired. After many false starts, Garfield, with the support of Lincoln, procured the passage of a conscription bill that excluded commutation. Under Chases influence, Garfield became a staunch proponent of a dollar backed by a gold standard, and was therefore a strong opponent of the greenback he regretted very much, but understood, the necessity for suspension of payment in gold or silver during the emergency presented by the Civil War. Garfield voted with the Radical Republicans in passing the Wade Davis Bill, designed to give Congress more authority over Reconstruction, but it was defeated by Lincolns pocket veto. Garfield did not consider Lincoln particularly worthy of reelection, but no viable alternative seemed available. He will probably be the man, though I think we could do better. The Ohioan attended the party convention and promoted Rosecrans as Lincolns running mate, but delegates chose Military Governor of Tennessee Andrew Johnson. Both Lincoln and Garfield were reelected. By then, Chase had left the Cabinet and had been appointed Chief Justice, and his relations with Garfield became more distant. Garfield took up the practice of law in 1865 as a means to improve his personal finances. His efforts took him to Wall Street where, the day after Lincolns assassination, a riotous crowd led him into an impromptu speech to calm it Fellow citizens Clouds and darkness are round about Him His pavilion is dark waters and thick clouds of the skies Justice and judgment are the establishment of His throne Mercy and truth shall go before His face Fellow citizens God reigns, and the Government at Washington still lives The speech, with no mention or praise of Lincoln, was according to Garfield biographer Robert G. Caldwell ...quite as significant for what it did not contain as for what it did. In the following years, Garfield had more praise for Lincoln a year after the Illinoisans death Garfield stated that, Greatest among all these developments were the character and fame of Abraham Lincoln, and in 1878 called Lincoln ...one of the few great rulers whose wisdom increased with his power. Reconstruction Garfield was as firm a supporter of black suffrage as he had been of abolition, though he admitted that the idea of African Americans as political equals with whites gave him a strong feeling of repugnance and, like Lincoln, was a supporter of American blacks colonizing Africa. The new president, Johnson, sought the rapid restoration of the Southern states during the months between his accession and the meeting of Congress in December 1865 Garfield hesitantly supported this policy as an experiment. Johnson, an old friend, sought Garfields backing, and their conversations led Garfield to assume that differences between president and Congress were not large. When Congress assembled in December , Garfield urged conciliation on his colleagues, although he feared that Johnson, a former Democrat, might combine with other Democrats to gain political control if he rejoined the party. Garfield foresaw conflict even before February 1866 when Johnson vetoed a bill to extend the life of the Freedmens Bureau, charged with aiding the former slaves. By April, Garfield had concluded that Johnson was either crazy or drunk with opium. Garfield Monument, by the Capitol, where he served almost twenty years The conflict between the branches of government was the major issue of the 1866 campaign, with Johnson taking to the campaign trail in a Swing Around the Circle and Garfield facing opposition within his party in his home district. With the South still disenfranchised and Northern public opinion behind them, the Republicans gained a twothirds majority in both houses of Congress. Garfield, having overcome his challengers at his district nominating convention, was easily reelected. Garfield opposed the initial talk of impeaching President Johnson when Congress convened in December 1866. However, he supported legislation to limit Johnsons powers, such as the Tenure of Office Act, which restricted Johnson in removing presidential appointees. Distracted by committee duties, he rarely spoke in connection with these bills, but was a loyal Republican vote against Johnson. Due to a court case, he was absent on the day in April 1868 when the House impeached Johnson, but soon gave a speech aligning himself with Thaddeus Stevens and others who sought Johnsons removal. When the president was acquitted in trial before the Senate, Garfield was shocked, and blamed the outcome of the trial on its presiding officer, Chief Justice Chase, his onetime mentor. By the time Ulysses S. Grant succeeded Johnson in 1869, Garfield had moved away from the remaining radicals . He hailed the ratification of the 15th Amendment in 1870 as a triumph, and he favored the readmission of Georgia to the Union as a matter of right, not politics. In 1871, Garfield opposed passage of the Ku Klux Klan Act, saying, I have never been more perplexed by a piece of legislation. He was torn between his indignation at these terrorists and his concern for the freedoms endangered by the power the bill gave to the president to enforce the act through suspension of habeas corpus. Tariffs and finance The greenback so despised by Garfield Throughout his political career, Garfield favored the gold standard and decried attempts to increase the money supply through the issuance of paper money not backed by gold, and later, through the free and unlimited coinage of silver. In 1865, Garfield was placed on the House Ways and Means Committee, a longawaited opportunity to focus on financial and economic issues. He reprised his opposition to the greenback, saying, Any party which commits itself to paper money will go down amid the general disaster, covered with the curses of a ruined people. In 1868 Garfield gave a twohour speech on currency in the House, which was widely applauded as his best oratory to that point in it he advocated a gradual resumption of specie payments, that is, the government paying out silver and gold, rather than paper money that could not be redeemed. Tariffs had been raised to high levels during the Civil War. Afterwards, Garfield, who made a close study of financial affairs, advocated moving towards free trade, though the standard Republican position was a protective tariff that would allow American industries to grow. This break with his party likely cost him his place on the Ways and Means Committee in 1867, and though Republicans held the majority in the House until 1875, Garfield remained off that committee during that time. Garfield came to chair the powerful House Appropriations Committee, but it was Ways and Means, with its influence over fiscal policy, that he really wanted to lead. Part of the reason Garfield was denied a place on Ways and Means was the opposition of the influential Republican editor, Horace Greeley. Garfields handwriting on evidence used during the Gold Panic investigation in 1870 In September 1870, Garfield, who was then chairman of the House Banking Committee, led an investigation into the Black Friday Gold Panic scandal. The committee investigation into corruption was thorough, but found no indictable offenses. Garfield blamed the easy availability of fiat money greenbacks for financing the speculation that led to the scandal. Garfield was not at all enthused about the reelection of President Grant in 1872 until Horace Greeley, who emerged as the candidate of the Democrats and Liberal Republicans, became the only serious alternative. Garfield opined, I would say Grant was not fit to be nominated and Greeley is not fit to be elected. Both Grant and Garfield won overwhelming reelection victories. Crdit Mobilier scandal Salary Grab The Crdit Mobilier of America scandal involved corruption in the financing of the Union Pacific Railroad, part of the transcontinental railroad that was completed in 1869. Union Pacific officers and directors secretly purchased control of the Crdit Mobilier of America company, then contracted with the firm to have it undertake the construction of the railroad. The grossly inflated invoices submitted by the company were paid by the railroad, using federal funds appropriated to subsidize the project, and the company was allowed to purchase Union Pacific securities at par value, well below the market rate. Crdit Mobilier showed large profits and stock gains, and distributed substantial dividends. The high expenses meant that Congress was called upon to appropriate more funds. One of the railroad officials who controlled Crdit Mobilier was also a congressman, Oakes Ames of Massachusetts. He offered some of his colleagues the opportunity to buy Crdit Mobilier stock at par value, well below what it sold for on the market, and the railroad got its additional appropriations. Editorial cartoon Uncle Sam directs U.S. Senators and Representatives implicated in the Crdit Mobilier scheme to commit HaraKiri. The story broke in July 1872, in the middle of the presidential campaign. Among those named were Vice President Schuyler Colfax, Grants secondterm running mate , Speaker James G. Blaine of Maine, and Garfield. Greeley had little luck taking advantage of the scandal. When Congress reconvened after the election, Blaine, seeking to clear his name, demanded a House investigation. Evidence before the special committee exonerated Blaine. Garfield had stated, in September 1872, that Ames had offered him stock, but he had repeatedly refused it. Testifying before the committee in January, Ames alleged that he had offered Garfield ten shares of stock at par value, but that Garfield had never taken the shares, or paid for them. A year had passed, from 1867 to 1868, before Garfield had finally refused it. Garfield, appearing before the committee on January 14, 1873, confirmed much of this. Ames testified several weeks later that Garfield agreed to take the stock on credit, and that it was paid for by the companys huge dividends. The two men differed over a sum of some 300 that Garfield received and later paid back, with Garfield deeming it a loan and Ames a dividend. Garfields biographers were unwilling to exonerate him in Crdit Mobilier, with Allan Peskin writing, Did Garfield lie Not exactly. Did he tell the truth Not completely. Was he corrupted Not really. Even Garfields enemies never claimed that his involvement... influenced his behavior. Rutkow wrote that Garfields real offense was that he knowingly denied to the House investigating committee that he had agreed to accept the stock and that he had also received a dividend of 329. Caldwell suggested that Garfield ...while he told the truth the committee, certainly failed to tell the whole truth, clearly evading an answer to certain vital questions and thus giving the impression of worse faults than those of which he was guilty. That Crdit Mobilier was a corrupt organization had been a secret badly kept, even mentioned on the floor of Congress, and editor Sam Bowles wrote at the time that Garfield, in his positions on committees dealing with finance, ...had no more right to be ignorant in a matter of such grave importance as this, than the sentinel has to snore on his post. Another issue that caused Garfield trouble in his 1874 reelection bid was the socalled Salary Grab of 1873, which increased the compensation for members of Congress by 50 percent, retroactive to 1871. Garfield was responsible, as Appropriations Committee chairman, for shepherding the legislative appropriations bill through the House during the debate in February 1873, Massachusetts Representative Benjamin Butler offered the increase as an amendment, and despite Garfields opposition, it passed the House and eventually became law. The law was very popular in the House, as almost half the members were lame ducks, but the public was outraged, and many of Garfields constituents blamed him, though he refused to accept the increase. In what was a bad year for Republicans, who lost control of the House for the first time since the Civil War, Garfield had his closest congressional election, winning with only 57 percent of the vote. Minority leader Hayes administration With the Democratic takeover of the House of Representatives in 1875, Garfield lost his chairmanship of the Appropriations Committee. The Democratic leadership in the House appointed Garfield as a Republican member of Ways and Means. With many of his leadership rivals defeated in the 1874 Democratic landslide, and Blaine elected to the Senate, Garfield was seen as the Republican floor leader and the likely Speaker should the party regain control of the chamber. As the 1876 presidential election approached, Garfield was loyal to the candidacy of Senator Blaine, and fought for the former Speakers nomination at the 1876 Republican National Convention in Cincinnati. When it became clear, after six ballots, that Blaine could not prevail, the convention nominated Ohio Governor Rutherford B. Hayes. Although Garfield had supported Blaine, he had kept good relations with Hayes, and wholeheartedly supported the governor. Garfield had hoped to retire from politics after his term expired to devote himself fulltime to the practice of law, but to help his party, he sought reelection, and won it easily that October. Any celebration was short lived, as Garfields youngest son, Neddie, fell ill with whooping cough shortly after the congressional election, and soon died. Garfield served on the Electoral Commission that decided the disputed 1876 presidential election. When Hayes appeared to have lost the presidential election the following month to Democrat Samuel Tilden, the Republicans launched efforts to reverse the result in Southern states where they held the governorship South Carolina, Louisiana, and Florida. If Hayes won all three states, he would take the election by a single electoral vote. Grant asked Garfield to serve as a neutral observer in the recount in Louisiana. The observers soon recommended to the state electoral commissions that Hayes be declared the winner Garfield recommended that the entire vote of West Feliciana Parish, which had given Tilden a sizable majority, be thrown out. The Republican governors of the three states certified that Hayes had won their states, to the outrage of Democrats, who had the state legislatures submit rival returns, and threatened to prevent the counting of the electoral vote under the Constitution, Congress is the final arbiter of the election. Congress then passed a bill establishing the Electoral Commission, to determine the winner. Although he opposed the Commission, feeling that Congress should count the vote and proclaim Hayes victorious, Garfield was appointed to it over the objections of Democrats that he was too partisan. Hayes emerged the victor by a Commission vote of 8 to 7, with all eight votes being cast by Republican politicians or appointees of that party to the Supreme Court. As part of the deal whereby they recognized Hayes as president, Southern Democrats secured the removal of federal troops from the South, ending Reconstruction. Although a Senate seat would be disposed of by the Ohio General Assembly after the resignation of John Sherman to become Treasury Secretary, Hayes needed Garfields expertise to protect him from the agenda of a hostile Congress, and asked him not to seek it. Garfield, as the presidents key legislator, gained considerable prestige and respect for his role. When Congress debated what became the BlandAllison Act, to have the government purchase large quantities of silver and strike it into fully legal tender dollar coins, Garfield fought against this deviation from the gold standard, but it was enacted over Hayess veto in February 1878. Garfield during this time purchased the property in Mentor that reporters later dubbed Lawnfield, and from which he would conduct the first successful front porch campaign for the presidency. Hayes suggested that Garfield run for governor in 1879, seeing that as a road that would likely put Garfield in the White House. Garfield preferred to seek election as senator, and devoted his efforts to seeing that Republicans won the 1879 election for the General Assembly, with the likely Democratic candidate the incumbent, Allen G. Thurman. The Republicans swept the legislative elections. Rivals were spoken of for the seat, such as Secretary Sherman, but he had presidential ambitions , and other candidates fell by the wayside. Garfield was elected to the Senate by the General Assembly in January 1880, though his term was not to begin until March 4, 1881. Legal career and other activities Garfield was one of three attorneys who argued for the petitioners in the landmark Supreme Court case Ex parte Milligan in 1866. His clients were proConfederate northern men who had been found guilty and sentenced to death by a military court for treasonous activities. The case turned on whether the defendants should instead have been tried by a civilian court, and resulted in a ruling that civilians could not be tried before military tribunals while the civil courts were operating. The oral argument was Garfields first court appearance. Jeremiah Black had taken him in as a junior partner a year before, and assigned the case to him in light of his highly regarded oratory skills. With the result, Garfield instantly achieved a reputation as a preeminent appellate lawyer. During Grants first term, discontented with public service, Garfield pursued opportunities in the law, but declined a partnership offer when told his prospective partner was of intemperate and licentious reputation. In 1873, after the death of Chase, Garfield appealed to Grant to appoint Justice Noah H. Swayne as Chief Justice. Grant, however, appointed Morrison R. Waite. Garfield thought the land grants given to expanding railroads was an unjust practice. He also opposed some monopolistic practices by corporations, as well as the power sought by workers unions. Garfield supported the proposed establishment of the United States civil service as a means of ridding officials of the annoyance of aggressive office seekers. He especially wished to eliminate the common practice whereby government workers, in exchange for their positions, were forced to kick back a percentage of their wages as political contributions. In 1876, Garfield displayed his mathematical talent when he developed a trapezoid proof of the Pythagorean theorem. His finding was placed in the New England Journal of Education . Mathematics historian William Dunham stated that Garfields trapezoid work was ...really a very clever proof. Presidential election of 1880 Republican nomination Following Grants defeat for the nomination Puck magazine satirized Robert E. Lees surrender to him at Appomattox by depicting Grant giving up his sword to Garfield. Having just been elected to the Senate with Shermans support, Garfield entered the 1880 campaign season committed to Sherman as his choice for the Republican presidential nominee. Even before the convention began, however, a few Republicans, including Wharton Barker of Philadelphia, thought Garfield the best choice for the nomination. Garfield denied any interest in the position, but the attention was enough to make Sherman suspicious of his lieutenants ambitions. Besides Sherman, the early favorites for the nomination were Blaine and former president Grant, but several other candidates attracted delegates as well. As the convention began, Senator Roscoe Conkling of New York, the floor leader for the Grant forces , proposed that the delegates pledge to support the eventual nominee in the general election. When three West Virginia delegates declined to be so bound, Conkling sought to expel them from the convention. Garfield rose to defend the men, giving a passionate speech in defense of their right to reserve judgment. The crowd turned against Conkling, and he withdrew the motion. The performance delighted Garfields boosters, who now believed more than ever that he was the only man who could attract a majority of the delegates votes. After speeches in favor of the other frontrunners, Garfield rose to place Shermans name in nomination his nominating speech was wellreceived, but the delegates mustered little excitement for the idea of Sherman as the next president. The first ballot showed Grant leading with 304 votes and Blaine in second with 284 Shermans 93 placed him in a distant third. Subsequent ballots quickly demonstrated a deadlock between the Grant and Blaine forces, with neither having the 379 votes needed for nomination. Jeremiah McLain Rusk, a member of the Wisconsin delegation, and Benjamin Harrison, an Indiana delegate, sought to break the deadlock by shifting a few of the antiGrant votes to a dark horse candidate Garfield. Garfield gained 50 votes on the 35th ballot, and the stampede began. Garfield protested to the other members of his Ohio delegation that he had not sought the nomination and had never intended to betray Sherman, but they overruled his objections and cast their ballots for him. In the next round of voting, nearly all of the Sherman and Blaine delegates shifted their support to Garfield, giving him 399 votes and the Republican nomination. Most of the Grant forces backed the former president to the end, creating a disgruntled Stalwart minority in the party. To obtain that factions support for the ticket, former New York customs collector Chester A. Arthur, a member of Conklings political machine, was chosen as the vicepresidential nominee. Campaign against Hancock Garfield Arthur election poster Despite including a Stalwart on the ticket, animosity between the Republican factions carried over from the convention, and Garfield traveled to New York to meet with party leaders there. After convincing the Stalwart crowd to put aside their differences and unite for the coming campaign, Garfield returned to Ohio, leaving the active campaigning to others, as was traditional at the time. Meanwhile, the Democrats settled on their nominee, Major General Winfield Scott Hancock of Pennsylvania, a career military officer. Hancock and the Democrats expected to carry the Solid South, while much of the North was considered safe territory for Garfield and the Republicans most of the campaign would involve a few close states, including New York and Indiana. The rear of the house at Garfields Lawnfield estate, from which he conducted his front porch campaign 1880 electoral vote results Practical differences between the candidates were few, and Republicans began the campaign with the familiar theme of waving the bloody shirt reminding Northern voters that the Democratic Party was responsible for secession and four years of civil war, and that if Democrats held power they would reverse the gains of that war, dishonor Union veterans, and pay Confederate veterans pensions out of the federal treasury. With fifteen years having passed since the end of the war, and Union generals at the head of both tickets, the bloody shirt was of diminishing value in exciting the voters. With a few months to go before the election, the Republicans switched tactics to emphasize the tariff. Seizing on the Democratic platforms call for a tariff for revenue only, Republicans told Northern workers that a Hancock presidency would weaken the tariff protection that kept them in good jobs. Hancock made the situation worse when, attempting to strike a moderate stance, he said, The tariff question is a local question. The ploy proved effective in uniting the North behind Garfield. In the end, fewer than two thousand votes, of the more than 9.2 million popular votes cast, separated the two candidates,but in the Electoral College Garfield had an easy victory over Hancock, 214 to 155. Presidency, 1881 President Garfield Cabinet and inauguration Between his election and his inauguration, Garfield was occupied with assembling a cabinet that would establish peace between Conklings and Blaines warring factions. Blaines delegates had provided much of the support for Garfields nomination, and the Maine senator received the place of honor Secretary of State. Blaine was not only the presidents closest advisor, he was obsessed with knowing all that took place in the White House, and was even said to have spies posted there in his absence. Garfield nominated William Windom of Minnesota as Secretary of the Treasury, William H. Hunt of Louisiana as Secretary of the Navy, Robert Todd Lincoln as Secretary of War, and Samuel J. Kirkwood of Iowa as Secretary of the Interior. New York was represented by Thomas Lemuel James as Postmaster General. Garfield appointed Pennsylvanias Wayne MacVeagh, an adversary of Blaines, as Attorney General. Blaine tried to sabotage the appointment by convincing Garfield to name an opponent of MacVeagh, William E. Chandler, as Solicitor General under MacVeagh. Only Chandlers rejection by the Senate forestalled MacVeaghs resignation over the matter. Distracted by cabinet maneuvering, Garfields inaugural address was not up to his typical oratorical standards. In one high point, Garfield emphasized the civil rights of AfricanAmericans, saying Freedom can never yield its fullness of blessings so long as the law or its administration places the smallest obstacle in the pathway of any virtuous citizen. After discussing the gold standard, the need for education, and an unexpected denunciation of Mormon polygamy, the speech ended. The crowd applauded, but the speech, according to Peskin, however sincerely intended, betrayed its hasty composition by the flatness of its tone and the conventionality of its subject matter. Garfields appointment of James infuriated Conkling, a factional opponent of the Postmaster General, who demanded a compensatory appointment for his faction, such as the position of Secretary of the Treasury. The resulting squabble occupied much of Garfields brief presidency. The feud with Conkling reached a climax when the president, at Blaines instigation, nominated Conklings enemy, Judge William H. Robertson, to be Collector of the Port of New York. This was one of the prize patronage positions below cabinet level, and was then held by Edwin A. Merritt. Conkling raised the timehonored principle of senatorial courtesy in an attempt to defeat the nomination, to no avail. Garfield, who believed the practice was corrupt, would not back down and threatened to withdraw all nominations unless Robertson was confirmed, intending to settle the question whether the President is registering clerk of the Senate or the Executive of the United States. Ultimately, Conkling and his New York colleague, Senator Thomas C. Platt, resigned their Senate seats to seek vindication, but found only further humiliation when the New York legislature elected others in their places. Robertson was confirmed as Collector and Garfields victory was clear. To Blaines chagrin, the victorious Garfield returned to his goal of balancing the interests of party factions, and nominated a number of Conklings Stalwart friends to offices. Reforms An 1881 Puck cartoon shows Garfield finding a baby at his front door with a tag marked Civil Service Reform, compliments of R.B. Hayes. Hayes, his predecessor in the presidency, is seen in the background dressed like a woman and holding a bag marked R.B. Hayes Savings, Fremont, Ohio. Grant and Hayes had both advocated civil service reform, and by 1881, civil service reform associations had organized with renewed energy across the nation. Garfield sympathized with them, believing that the spoils system damaged the presidency and distracted from more important concerns. Some reformers were disappointed that Garfield had advocated limited tenure only to minor office seekers and had given appointments to his old friends, but many remained loyal and supported Garfield. Corruption in the post office also cried out for reform. In April 1880, there had been a congressional investigation into corruption in the Post Office Department, in which profiteering rings allegedly stole millions of dollars, securing bogus mail contracts on star routes. After obtaining contracts with the lowest bid, costs to run the mail routes would be escalated and profits would be divided among ring members. That year, Hayes stopped the implementation of any new star route contracts. Shortly after taking office, Garfield received information from Attorney General MacVeagh and Postmaster General James of postal corruption by an alleged star route ringleader, Second Assistant PostmasterGeneral Thomas J. Brady. Garfield demanded Bradys resignation and ordered prosecutions that would end in trials for conspiracy. When told that his party, including his own campaign manager, Stephen W. Dorsey, was involved, Garfield directed MacVeagh and James to root out the corruption in the Post Office Department to the bone, regardless of where it might lead. Brady resigned and was eventually indicted for conspiracy. After two star route ring trials in 1882 and 1883, the jury found Brady not guilty. Civil rights and education Official White House portrait of James Garfield Garfield believed that the key to improving the state of African American civil rights would be found in education aided by the federal government. During Reconstruction, freedmen had gained citizenship and suffrage that enabled them to participate in government, but Garfield believed their rights were being eroded by Southern white resistance and illiteracy, and was concerned that blacks would become Americas permanent peasantry. He answered by proposing a universal education system funded by the federal government. Congress and the northern white public, however, had lost interest in AfricanAmerican rights, and federal funding for universal education did not find support in Congress during Garfields term. Garfield also worked to appoint several African Americans to prominent positions Frederick Douglass, recorder of deeds in Washington Robert Elliot, special agent to the Treasury John M. Langston, Haitian minister and Blanche K. Bruce, register to the Treasury. Garfield believed that Southern support for the Republican party could be gained by commercial and industrial interests rather than race issues and began to reverse Hayess policy of conciliating Southern Democrats. He appointed William H. Hunt, a carpetbagger Republican from Louisiana, as Secretary of the Navy. To break the hold of the resurgent Democratic Party in the Solid South, Garfield took patronage advice from Virginia Senator William Mahone of the biracial independent Readjuster Party, hoping to add the independents strength to the Republicans there. Foreign policy and naval reform James G. Blaine, Garfields Secretary of State Entering the presidency, Garfield had little foreign policy experience, so he leaned heavily on Blaine. Blaine, a former protectionist, now agreed with Garfield on the need to promote freer trade, especially within the Western Hemisphere. Their reasons were twofold firstly, Garfield and Blaine believed that increasing trade with Latin America would be the best way to keep Great Britain from dominating the region. Secondly, by encouraging exports, they believed they could increase American prosperity. Garfield authorized Blaine to call for a PanAmerican conference in 1882 to mediate disputes among the Latin American nations and to serve as a forum for talks on increasing trade. At the same time, they hoped to negotiate a peace in the War of the Pacific then being fought by Bolivia, Chile, and Peru. Blaine favored a resolution that would not result in Peru yielding any territory, but Chile, which by 1881 had occupied the Peruvian capital, Lima, rejected any settlement that restored the previous status quo . Garfield sought to expand American influence in other areas, calling for renegotiation of the ClaytonBulwer Treaty to allow the United States to construct a canal through Panama without British involvement, as well as attempting to reduce British influence in the strategically located Kingdom of Hawaii. Garfields and Blaines plans for the United States involvement in the world stretched even beyond the Western Hemisphere, as he sought commercial treaties with Korea and Madagascar. Garfield also considered enhancing the United States military strength abroad, asking Navy Secretary Hunt to investigate the condition of the navy with an eye toward expansion and modernization. In the end, these ambitious plans came to nothing after Garfield was assassinated. Nine countries had accepted invitations to the PanAmerican conference, but the invitations were withdrawn in April 1882 after Blaine resigned from the cabinet and Arthur, Garfields successor, cancelled the conference. Naval reform continued under Arthur, if on a more modest scale than Garfield and Hunt had envisioned, ultimately ending in the construction of the Squadron of Evolution. Administration and cabinet Assassination Garfield, shot by Charles J. Guiteau, collapses as Secretary of State Blaine gestures for help. Engraving from Frank Leslies Illustrated Newspaper Guiteau and shooting Garfield was shot by Charles J. Guiteau, a disgruntled office seeker, at the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station in Washington, D.C. on July 2, 1881. After eleven weeks of intensive and other care Garfield died in Elberon, New Jersey, the second of four Presidents to be assassinated, following Abraham Lincoln. Guiteau had followed various professions in his life, but in 1880 had determined to gain federal office by supporting what he expected would be the winning Republican ticket. He composed a speech, Garfield vs. Hancock, and got it printed by the Republican National Committee. One means of persuading the voters in that era was through orators expounding on the candidates merits, but with the Republicans seeking more famous men, Guiteau received few opportunities to speak. On one occasion, according to Kenneth D. Ackerman in his book about Garfields candidacy and assassination, Guiteau was unable to finish his speech due to nerves. Guiteau, who considered himself a Stalwart, deemed his contribution to Garfields victory sufficient to justify the position of consul in Paris, despite the fact he spoke no French, nor any foreign language. One of President Garfields more wearying duties was seeing office seekers, and he saw Guiteau at least once. White House officials suggested to Guiteau that he approach Blaine, as the consulship was within the Department of State. Blaine also saw the public regularly, and Guiteau became a regular at these sessions. Blaine, who had no intention of giving Guiteau a position he was unqualified for and had not earned, simply stated that the deadlock in the Senate over Robertsons nomination made it impossible to consider the Paris consulship, which required Senate confirmation. Once the New York senators had resigned, and Robertson had been confirmed as Collector, Guiteau pressed his claim, and Blaine told him he would not receive the position. Guiteau came to believe he had lost the position because he was a Stalwart. The officeseeker decided that the only way to end the internecine warfare in the Republican Party was for Garfield to die though he had nothing personal against the president. Arthurs succession would restore peace, he felt, and lead to rewards for fellow Stalwarts, including Guiteau. The assassination of Abraham Lincoln was deemed a fluke due to the Civil War, and Garfield, like most people, saw no reason why the president should be guarded Garfields movements and plans were often printed in the newspapers. Guiteau knew the president would leave Washington for a cooler climate on July 2, and made plans to kill him before then. He purchased a gun he thought would look good in a museum, and followed Garfield several times, but each time his plans were frustrated, or he lost his nerve. His opportunities dwindled to one Garfields departure by train for New Jersey on the morning of July 2, 1881. Guiteau concealed himself by the ladies waiting room at the Sixth Street Station of the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad, from where Garfield was scheduled to depart. Most of Garfields cabinet planned to accompany him at least part of the way. Blaine, who was to remain in Washington, came to the station to see him off. The two men were deep in conversation and did not notice Guiteau before he took out his revolver and shot Garfield twice, once in the back and once in the arm. The time was 930a.m. The assassin attempted to leave the station, but was quickly captured. As Blaine recognized him and Guiteau made no secret of why he had shot Garfield, the assassins motivation to benefit the Stalwarts reached many with the early news of the shooting, causing rage against that faction. Treatment and death Baltimore Potomac Railroad Passenger Terminal in Washington where Garfield was shot July 2, 1881. Garfield was hit by two shots one glanced off his arm while the other pierced his back, shattering a rib and embedding itself in his abdomen. My God, what is this he exclaimed. Guiteau, as he was led away, stated, I did it. I will go to jail for it. I am a Stalwart and Arthur will be President. Among those at the station was Robert Todd Lincoln, who sixteen years before had watched his father die from an assassins bullet. Garfield was taken on a mattress upstairs to a private office, where several doctors examined him, probing the wound with unwashed fingers. At his request, Garfield was taken back to the White House, and his wife, then in New Jersey, was sent for. Blaine sent word to Vice President Arthur in New York City, who received threats against his life because of his animosity toward Garfield and Guiteaus statements. Although Joseph Listers pioneering work in antisepsis was known to American doctors, with Lister himself having visited America in 1876, few of them had confidence in it, and none of his advocates were among Garfields treating physicians. The physician who took charge at the depot and then at the White House was Doctor Willard Bliss. A noted physician and surgeon, Bliss was an old friend of Garfield, and about a dozen doctors, led by Bliss, were soon probing the wound with unsterilized fingers and instruments. Garfield was given morphine for the pain, and asked Bliss to frankly tell him his chances, which Bliss put at one in a hundred. Well, Doctor, well take that chance. Over the next few days, Garfield made some improvement, as the nation viewed the news from the capital and prayed. Although he never stood again, he was able to sit up and write several times, and his recovery was viewed so positively that a steamer was fitted out as a seagoing hospital to aid with his convalescence. He was nourished on oatmeal porridge and milk from a cow on the White House lawn. When told that Indian chief Sitting Bull, a prisoner of the army, was starving, Garfield said, Let him starve, then, Oh, no, send him my oatmeal. Xradiation usage, which likely would have helped the presidents physicians determine exactly where the bullet was lodged in his body, would not be invented for another fourteen years. Alexander Graham Bell tried to locate the bullet with a primitive metal detector he was not successful. One means of keeping the president comfortable in Washingtons summer heat was one of the first successful air conditioning units air that was propelled by fans over ice and then dried had reduced the temperature in the sickroom by 20 degrees Fahrenheit . Beginning on July 23, Garfield took a turn for the worse. His temperature increased to doctors, concerned by an abscess that had developed by the wound, operated and inserted a drainage tube. This initially seemed to help, and Garfield, in his bed, was able to hold a brief cabinet meeting on July 29, though members were under orders from Bliss to discuss nothing that might excite Garfield. Doctors probed the abscess, which went into Garfields body, hoping to find the bullet they most likely only made the infections worse. Garfield performed only one state act in August, signing an extradition paper. By the end of the month, the president was much more feeble than he had been, and his weight had decreased to . Garfield had long been anxious to escape hot, unhealthy Washington, and in early September the doctors agreed to move him to Elberon, where his wife had recovered earlier in the summer. He left the White House for the last time on September 5, traveling in a specially cushioned railway car a spur line to the Franklyn Cottage, a seaside mansion given over to his use, was built in a night by volunteers. There, Garfield could see the ocean as officials and reporters maintained what became a death watch. Garfields personal secretary, Joe Stanley Brown, wrote 40 years later, to this day I cannot hear the sound of the low slow roll of the Atlantic on the shore, the sound which filled my ears as I walked from my cottage to his bedside, without recalling again that ghastly tragedy. On September 18, Garfield asked A.F. Rockwell, a friend, if he would have a place in history. Rockwell assured him he would, and told Garfield he had much work still before him. But his response was, No, my work is done. The following day, Garfield, by then also suffering from pneumonia and heart pains, marveled that he could not pick up a glass despite feeling well, and went to sleep without discomfort. He awoke that evening around 1015 pm with great pain in his chest. The attendant watching him sent for Bliss, who found him unconscious. Despite efforts to revive him, Garfield never awoke, and died at 1035 pm that evening. Learning from a reporter of Garfields death, Arthur took the presidential oath of office administered by New York Supreme Court Justice John R. Brady. According to some historians and medical experts, Garfield might have survived his wounds had the doctors attending him had at their disposal todays medical research, techniques, and equipment. Standard medical practice at the time dictated that priority be given to locating the path of the bullet. Several of his doctors inserted their unsterilized fingers into the wound to probe for the bullet, a common practice in the 1880s. Historians agree that massive infection was a significant factor in President Garfields demise. Biographer Peskin stated that medical malpractice did not contribute to Garfields death the inevitable infection and blood poisoning that would ensue from a deep bullet wound resulted in damage to multiple organs and spinal bone fragmentation. Rutkow, a professor of surgery at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, has argued that starvation also played a role. Rutkow suggests that Garfield had such a nonlethal wound. In todays world, he would have gone home in a matter of two or three days. Guiteau was indicted on October 14, 1881, for the murder of the President. In a chaotic trial in which Guiteau often interrupted and argued, and in which his counsel used the insanity defense, the jury found him guilty on January 5, 1882, and he was sentenced to death by hanging. Guiteau might have had neurosyphilis, a disease that causes physiological mental impairment. He was executed on June 30, 1882. Funeral, memorials and commemorations Garfields funeral train left Long Branch on the same special track that brought him there, traveling over tracks blanketed with flowers and past houses adorned with flags. His body was transported to the Capitol and then continued on to Cleveland for burial. More than 70,000 citizens, some waiting over three hours, passed by Garfields coffin as his body lay in state in Washington later, on September 25, 1881, in Cleveland, more than 150,000 a number equal to the entire population of that city likewise paid their respects. His body was temporarily interred in a vault in Clevelands Lake View Cemetery until his permanent memorial was built. Memorials to Garfield were erected across the country. On April 10, 1882, seven months after Garfields death, the U.S. Post Office issued a postage stamp in his honor, the second stamp issued by the U.S. to honor an assassinated president. In 1884, sculptor Frank Happersberger completed a monument on the grounds of the San Francisco Conservatory of Flowers. In 1887, the James A. Garfield Monument was dedicated in Washington. Another monument, in Philadelphias Fairmount Park, was erected in 1896. In Victoria, Australia, Cannibal Creek was renamed Garfield in his honor. On May 19, 1890, Garfields body was permanently interred, with great solemnity and fanfare, in a mausoleum in Lake View Cemetery in Cleveland. Attending the dedication ceremonies were former president Hayes, President Benjamin Harrison, and future president William McKinley. Garfields Treasury Secretary, William Windom, also attended. Harrison said that Garfield was always a student and instructor and that his life works and death would ...continue to be instructive and inspiring incidents in American history. Three panels on the monument display Garfield as a teacher, Union major general, and orator another shows him taking the Presidential oath, and a fifth shows his body lying in state at the Capitol rotunda in Washington, D.C. Garfields murder by a deranged officeseeker awakened public awareness of the need for civil service reform legislation. Senator George H. Pendleton, a Democrat from Ohio, launched a reform effort that resulted in the Pendleton Act in January 1883. This act reversed the spoils system where office seekers paid up or gave political service to obtain or keep federally appointed positions. Under the act, appointments were awarded on merit and competitive examination. To ensure the reform was implemented, Congress and Arthur established and funded the Civil Service Commission. The Pendleton Act, however, covered only 10 of federal government workers. For Arthur, previously known for having been a veteran spoilsman, civil service reform became his most noteworthy achievement. FileGarfieldcasket.jpgGarfields casket lying in state at the Capitol Rotunda FileGarfieldMonument.jpgGarfield Memorial at Lake View Cemetery in Cleveland, Ohio FileJames Abram Garfield Monument, San Francisco.jpgGarfield Monument, Golden Gate Park, San Francisco by Frank Happersberger FileJames Garfield2 1882 Issue5c.jpgFirst Garfield postage stamp, 1882 Legacy and historical view For a few years after his assassination, Garfields life story was seen as an exemplar of the American success story that even the poorest boy might someday become President of the United States. Peskin noted that, In mourning Garfield, Americans were not only honoring a president they were paying tribute to a man whose life story embodied their own most cherished aspirations. As the rivalry between Stalwarts and HalfBreeds faded from the scene in the late 1880s and after, so too did memories of Garfield. Beginning in 1882, the year after Garfields death, the U.S. Post Office began issuing postage stamps honoring the late President. Despite his short term as President, nine different issues were printed over the years. In the 1890s, Americans became disillusioned with politicians, and looked elsewhere for inspiration, focusing on industrialists, labor leaders, scientists, and others as their heroes. Increasingly, Garfields short time as president was forgotten. The 20th century saw no revival for Garfield. Thomas Wolfe deemed the presidents of the Gilded Age, including Garfield, lost Americans whose gravely vacant and bewhiskered faces mixed, melted, swam together. The politicians of the Gilded Age faded from the public eye, their luster eclipsed by those who had influenced America outside of political office during that time the robber barons, the inventors, those who had sought social reform, and others who had lived as America rapidly changed. Current events and more recent figures occupied Americas attention according to Ackerman, the busy Twentieth Century has made Garfields era seem remote and irrelevant, its leaders ridiculed for their very obscurity. Garfields biographers, and those who have studied his presidency, tend to think well of him, and that his presidency saw a promising start before its untimely end. Historian Justus D. Doenecke, while deeming Garfield a bit of an enigma, chronicles his achievements, by winning a victory over the Stalwarts, he enhanced both the power and prestige of his office. As a man, he was intelligent, sensitive, and alert, and his knowledge of how government worked was unmatched. Yet Doenecke criticizes Garfields dismissal of Merritt in Robertsons favor, and wonders if the president was truly in command of the situation even after the latters confirmation. According to Caldwell, writing in 1931, If Garfield lives in history, it will be partly on account of the charm of his personality but also because in life and in death, he struck the first shrewd blows against a dangerous system of boss rule which seemed for a time about to engulf the politics of the nation. Perhaps if he had lived he could have done no more. Rutkow writes, James Abram Garfields presidency is reduced to a tantalizing what if. Peskin believes Garfield deserves more credit for his political career than he has received See also Notes References Works cited Books Periodicals Online Further reading External links White House biography James Garfield A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Essays on James A. Garfield, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Life Portrait of James Garfield, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , July 26, 1999 Notable alumni of Delta Upsilon fraternity, including Garfield James A. Garfield Personal Manuscripts Category1831 births Category1881 deaths Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury Disciples of Christ CategoryAmerican Disciples of Christ CategoryAmerican members of the Churches of Christ CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of Welsh descent CategoryAssassinated Presidents of the United States CategoryAssassinated heads of state CategoryBurials at Lake View Cemetery, Cleveland CategoryChristian Church clergy CategoryDeaths by firearm in New Jersey CategoryDeaths by firearm in Washington, D.C. CategoryDeaths from pneumonia CategoryDeaths from sepsis CategoryGarfield County, Colorado CategoryGarfield County, Nebraska CategoryGarfield County, Oklahoma CategoryGarfield County, Utah CategoryGarfield County, Washington CategoryHiram College alumni CategoryHiram College faculty CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryInfectious disease deaths in New Jersey CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Ohio CategoryMinisters of the Churches of Christ CategoryOhio lawyers CategoryOhio Republicans CategoryOhio State Senators CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law CategoryPeople from Hiram, Ohio CategoryPeople from Mentor, Ohio CategoryPeople murdered in Washington, D.C. CategoryPeople of Ohio in the American Civil War CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryUnion Army generals CategoryUnited States Army generals CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1880 CategoryWilliams Collegealumni
Lyndon Baines Johnson , often referred to as LBJ , was an American politician who served as the 36th President of the United States from 1963 to 1969, assuming the office after serving as the 37th Vice President of the United States from 1961 to 1963. A Democrat from Texas, he also served as a United States Representative and as the Majority Leader in the United States Senate. Johnson is one of only four people who have served in all four federal elected positions. Born in a farmhouse in Stonewall, Texas, Johnson was a high school teacher and worked as a Congressional aide before winning election to the House of Representatives in 1937. He won election to the Senate in 1948, and was appointed the position of Senate Majority Whip in 1951. He became the Senate Minority Leader in 1953 and the Senate Majority Leader in 1955. As a leader in the Senate, Johnson became known for his domineering personality and the Johnson treatment, his aggressive coercion of powerful politicians to advance legislation. Johnson ran for the Democratic nomination in the 1960 presidential election. Although unsuccessful, he accepted the invitation of thenSenator John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts to be his running mate. They went on to win a close election over the Republican ticket of Richard Nixon and Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., and Johnson was sworn in as Vice President on January 20, 1961. On November 22, 1963, Kennedy was shot in Dallas, Texas, and died the same day while hospitalized Johnson succeeded Kennedy as president. The following year, Johnson won a landslide in 1964, defeating Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona. In domestic policy, Johnson designed the Great Society legislation by expanding civil rights, public broadcasting, Medicare, Medicaid, aid to education, the arts, urban and rural development, public services, and his War on Poverty. Assisted in part by a growing economy, the War on Poverty helped millions of Americans rise above the poverty line during his administration. Civil rights bills that he signed into law banned racial discrimination in public facilities, interstate commerce, the workplace, and housing the Voting Rights Act prohibited certain requirements in southern states used to disenfranchise African Americans. With the passage of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, the countrys immigration system was reformed, encouraging greater immigration from regions other than Europe. Johnsons presidency marked the peak of modern liberalism after the New Deal era. In foreign policy, Johnson escalated American involvement in the Vietnam War. In 1964, Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which granted Johnson the power to use military force in Southeast Asia without having to ask for an official declaration of war. The number of American military personnel in Vietnam increased dramatically, from 16,000 advisors in noncombat roles in 1963 to 525,000 in 1967, many in combat roles. American casualties soared and the peace process bogged down. Growing unease with the war stimulated a large, angry antiwar movement based especially on university campuses. Johnson faced further troubles when summer riots broke out in most major cities after 1965, and crime rates soared, as his opponents raised demands for law and order policies. While he began his presidency with widespread approval, support for Johnson declined as the public became upset with both the war and the growing violence at home. In 1968, the Democratic Party factionalized as antiwar elements denounced Johnson he ended his bid for renomination after a disappointing finish in the New Hampshire primary. Nixon was elected to succeed him, as the New Deal coalition that had dominated presidential politics for 36 years collapsed. After he left office in January 1969, Johnson returned to his Texas ranch, where he died of a heart attack at age 64 on January 22, 1973. Johnson is ranked favorably by many historians because of his domestic policies and the passage of many major laws that affected civil rights, gun control, wilderness preservation, and Social Security. He also drew substantial criticism for his handling of the Vietnam War. Early years Sevenyearold Johnson with his trademark cowboy hat Lyndon Baines Johnson was born on August 27, 1908, near Stonewall, Texas, in a small farmhouse on the Pedernales River. He was the oldest of five children born to Samuel Ealy Johnson Jr. and Rebekah Baines . Johnson had one brother, Sam Houston Johnson , and three sisters Rebekah , Josefa , and Lucia . The nearby small town of Johnson City, Texas, was named after LBJs cousin, James Polk Johnson,Dallek 1991, p. 19. whose forebears had moved west from Oglethorpe County, Georgia. Johnson had English, German, and Ulster Scots ancestry. His patrilineal descent traces back to John Johnson, born in Dumfriesshire, Scotland in1590. He was maternally descended from pioneer Baptist clergyman George Washington Baines, who pastored eight churches in Texas, as well as others in Arkansas and Louisiana. Baines, the grandfather of Johnsons mother, was also the president of Baylor University during the American Civil War. Johnsons grandfather, Samuel Ealy Johnson Sr., was raised as a Baptist, and for a time was a member of the Christian Church . In his later years the grandfather became a Christadelphian Johnsons father also joined the Christadelphian Church toward the end of his life. Later, as a politician, Johnson was influenced in his positive attitude toward Jews by the religious beliefs that his family, especially his grandfather, had shared with him . Johnsons favorite Bible verse came from the King James Version of Isaiah 118. Come now, and let us reason together ...Page 149 of Killing Kennedy The End of Camelot by Bill OReilly Martin Dugard In school, Johnson was an awkward, talkative youth and was elected president of his 11thgrade class. He graduated in 1924 from Johnson City High School, where he participated in public speaking, debate, and baseball.Caro 1982. At age 15, Johnson was the youngest member of his class and is believed to have been the youngest graduate of the school. In the months following his graduation, Johnson moved to California amid pressure by his parents to go to college. Johnson supported himself by picking grapes.Oxford University Press He enrolled in Southwest Texas State Teachers College in the summer of 1924, where students from unaccredited high schools could take the 12thgrade courses needed for admission to SWTSTC at San Marcos. Johnson later said that he was kicked out of the school.Dallek 1991, p. 57 In 1926, Johnson enrolled at SWTSTC . He worked his way through school, participated in debate and campus politics, and edited the school newspaper, The College Star . The college years refined his skills of persuasion and political organization. For nine months, from 1928 to 1929, Johnson paused his studies to teach MexicanAmerican children at the segregated Welhausen School in Cotulla, some south of San Antonio in La Salle County. The job helped him to save money to complete his education, and he graduated in 1930. He taught in Pearsall High School in Pearsall, Texas, and afterward took a position as teacher of public speaking at Sam Houston High School in Houston. When he returned to San Marcos in 1965, after signing the Higher Education Act of 1965, Johnson reminisced Early political career Johnsons boss, U.S. Rep. Richard Kleberg After teaching in Houston, Johnson entered politics. In 1930, he campaigned for Texas State Senator Welly Hopkins in his run for Congress. Hopkins recommended him to Congressman Richard M. Kleberg, who made Johnson his legislative secretary. Johnson was elected speaker of the Little Congress, a group of Congressional aides, where he cultivated Congressmen, newspapermen and lobbyists. Johnsons friends soon included aides to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, as well as fellow Texans such as Vice President John Nance Garner. He also became a surrogate son to Sam Rayburn. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Governor James Allred of Texas, and Johnson, 1937. Johnson later used an edited version of this photo, with Allred airbrushed out, in his 1941 senatorial campaign. Johnson married Claudia Alta Taylor, also known as Lady Bird, of Karnack, Texas on November 17, 1934, after he attended Georgetown University Law Center for several months. The wedding was officiated by Rev. Arthur R. McKinstry at St. Marks Episcopal Church in San Antonio. They had two daughters, Lynda Bird, born in 1944, and Luci Baines, born in 1947. Johnson gave his children names with the LBJ initials his dog was Little Beagle Johnson. His was the LBJ Ranch his initials were on his cufflinks, ashtrays, and clothes. In 1935, he was appointed head of the Texas National Youth Administration, which enabled him to use the government to create education and job opportunities for young people. He resigned two years later to run for Congress. Johnson, a notoriously tough boss throughout his career, often demanded long workdays and work on weekends.Woods 2006, p. 131. He was described by friends, fellow politicians, and historians as motivated by an exceptional lust for power and control. As Johnsons biographer Robert Caro observes, Johnsons ambition was uncommon in the degree to which it was unencumbered by even the slightest excess weight of ideology, of philosophy, of principles, of beliefs.Caro 1982, p. 275. U.S. Congressional career U.S. House of Representatives In 1937, Johnson successfully campaigned in a special election for Texass 10th congressional district, that covered Austin and the surrounding hill country. He ran on a New Deal platform and was effectively aided by his wife. He served in the House from April 10, 1937, to January 3, 1949. President Franklin D. Roosevelt found Johnson to be a welcome ally and conduit for information, particularly with regard to issues concerning internal politics in Texas and the machinations of Vice President John Nance Garner and Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn. Johnson was immediately appointed to the Naval Affairs Committee. He worked for rural electrification and other improvements for his district. Johnson steered the projects towards contractors that he personally knew, such as the Brown Brothers, Herman and George, who would finance much of Johnsons future career. In 1941, he ran for the Democratic U.S. Senate nomination in a special election his main opponent was the sitting Governor of Texas, businessman and radio personality W. Lee ODaniel Johnson narrowly lost the Democratic primary, which was then tantamount to election, with ODaniel receiving 175,590 votes , and Johnson 174,279 . U.S. Naval Reserve LCDR Johnson, March 1942 Johnson was appointed a Lieutenant Commander in the U.S. Naval Reserve on June 21, 1940. While serving as a U.S. congressman, he was called to active duty three days after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941. His orders were to report to the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations in Washington, D.C. for instruction and training. Following his training, he asked Undersecretary of the Navy James Forrestal for a combat assignment.He was sent instead to inspect the shipyard facilities in Texas and on the West Coast. In the spring of 1942, President Roosevelt needed his own reports on what conditions were like in the Southwest Pacific. Roosevelt felt that information which flowed up the military chain of command needed to get delivered by a highly trusted political aide. From a suggestion by Forrestal, Roosevelt assigned Johnson to a threeman survey team of the Southwest Pacific.Dallek 1991, pp. 235 245. Johnson reported to General Douglas MacArthur in Australia. Johnson and two U.S. Army officers went to the 22nd Bomb Group base, which was assigned the high risk mission of bombing the Japanese airbase at Lae in New Guinea. Johnsons roommate was an army second lieutenant who was a B17 bomber pilot. On June 9, 1942, Johnson volunteered as an observer for an air strike mission on New Guinea by eleven B26 bombers that included his roommate in another plane. While on the mission, his roommate and his crews B26 bomber was shot down with none of the eight men surviving the crash into the water. Reports vary on what happened to the B26 bomber carrying Johnson during that mission. Johnsons biographer Robert Caro accepts Johnsons account, and supports it with testimony from the aircrew concerned the aircraft was attacked, disabling one engine, and it turned back before reaching its objective, though remaining under heavy fire. Others claim that it turned back because of generator trouble before reaching the objective and before encountering enemy aircraft and never came under fire. This is said to be supported by official flight records. Other airplanes that continued to the target came under fire near the target at about the same time that Johnsons plane was recorded as having landed back at the original airbase. MacArthur recommended Johnson for the Silver Star for gallantry in action. After it was approved by the army, he personally presented the medal to Johnson. Johnson who had used a camera as an observer, reported to Roosevelt, to the Navy leaders, and to Congress that conditions were deplorable and unacceptable. He argued that the South West Pacific urgently needed a higher priority and a larger share of war supplies. The warplanes sent there, for example, were far inferior to Japanese planes, and morale was bad. He told Forrestal that the Pacific Fleet had a critical need for 6,800 additional experienced men. Johnson prepared a twelvepoint program to upgrade the effort in the region, stressing greater cooperation and coordination within the various commands and between the different war theaters. Congress responded by making Johnson chairman of a highpowered subcommittee of the Naval Affairs Committee,Dallek 1991, p. 235. with a mission similar to that of the Truman Committee in the Senate. He probed the peacetime business as usual inefficiencies that permeated the naval war and demanded that admirals shape up and get the job done. Johnson went too far when he proposed a bill that would crack down on the draft exemptions of shipyard workers if they were absent from work too often organized labor blocked the bill and denounced him. Johnsons biographer, Robert Dallek concludes, The mission was a temporary exposure to danger calculated to satisfy Johnsons personal and political wishes, but it also represented a genuine effort on his part, however misplaced, to improve the lot of Americas fighting men.Dallek 1991, p. 237. He was released from active duty on July 17, 1942. He was promoted to commander on October 19, 1949 . He resigned from the Navy Reserve effective January 18, 1964. Johnson received the Silver Star, American Campaign Medal, AsiaticPacific Campaign Medal, and the World War II Victory Medal. Silver Star citation U.S. Senate Contested 1948 election As U.S. Senator from Texas In the 1948 elections, Johnson again ran for the Senate and won in a highly controversial result in a threeway Democratic Party primary. Johnson faced a wellknown former governor, Coke Stevenson, and George Peddy . Johnson drew crowds to fairgrounds with his rented helicopter dubbed The Johnson City Windmill. He raised money to flood the state with campaign circulars and won over conservatives by voting for the TaftHartley act as well as by criticizing unions. Stevenson came in first but lacked a majority, so a runoff was held Johnson campaigned even harder, while Stevensons efforts slumped. The runoff count took a week, handled by the Democratic State Central Committee . Johnson was finally announced the winner by 87 votes out of 988,295 cast. The Committee voted to certify Johnsons nomination by a majority of one , with the last vote cast on Johnsons behalf by Temple, Texas, publisher Frank W. Mayborn. There were many allegations of voter fraud one writer alleges that Johnsons campaign manager, future Texas governor John B. Connally, was connected with 202 ballots in Precinct 13 in Jim Wells County where the names had curiously been listed in alphabetical order with the same pen and handwriting, just at the close of polling. Some of these voters insisted that they had not voted that day.Caro 1990, pp. 360 361. Robert Caro argued in his 1989 book that Johnson had thus stolen the election in Jim Wells County, and that 10,000 ballots were also rigged in Bexar County alone.Woods 2006, p. 217 Caro 1989. Election judge Luis Salas said in 1977 that he had certified 202 fraudulent ballots for Johnson. The state Democratic convention upheld Johnson. Stevenson went to court, but Johnson prevailed with timely help from his friend Abe Fortas. He soundly defeated Republican Jack Porter in the general election in November and went to Washington, permanently dubbed Landslide Lyndon. Johnson, dismissive of his critics, happily adopted the nickname.Dallek 1991, p. 346. Freshman senator to majority whip Once in the Senate, Johnson was known among his colleagues for his highly successful courtships of older senators, especially Senator Richard Russell, Democrat from Georgia, the leader of the Conservative coalition and arguably the most powerful man in the Senate. Johnson proceeded to gain Russells favor in the same way that he had courted Speaker Sam Rayburn and gained his crucial support in the House. Johnson was appointed to the Senate Armed Services Committee, and later in 1950, he helped create the Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee. Johnson became its chairman and conducted investigations of defense costs and efficiency. These investigations revealed old investigations and demanded actions that were already being taken in part by the Truman Administration, although it can be said that the committees investigations reinforced the need for changes. Johnson gained headlines and national attention through his handling of the press, the efficiency with which his committee issued new reports, and the fact that he ensured that every report was endorsed unanimously by the committee. Johnson used his political influence in the Senate to receive broadcast licenses from the Federal Communications Commission in his wifes name. After the 1950 general elections, Johnson was chosen as Senate Majority Whip in 1951 under the new Majority Leader, Ernest McFarland of Arizona, and served from 1951 to 1953. Senate Democratic leader Senate Desk X, used by all Democratic leaders, including Johnson, since Joseph Taylor Robinson In the 1952 general election, Republicans won a majority in both the House and Senate. Among defeated Democrats that year was McFarland, who lost to upstart Barry Goldwater. In January 1953, Johnson was chosen by his fellow Democrats to be the minority leader he became the most junior Senator ever elected to this position. One of his first actions was to eliminate the seniority system in making appointments to committees, while retaining it for chairmanships. In the 1954 election, Johnson was reelected to the Senate, and since the Democrats won the majority in the Senate, Johnson then became majority leader. Former majority leader William Knowland became minority leader. Johnsons duties were to schedule legislation and help pass measures favored by the Democrats. Johnson, Rayburn and President Dwight D. Eisenhower worked well together in passing Eisenhowers domestic and foreign agenda. During the Suez Crisis, Johnson tried to prevent the US government from criticizing the Israeli invasion of the Sinai peninsula. Along with the rest of the nation, Johnson was appalled by the threat of possible Soviet domination of space flight implied by the launch of the first artificial Earth satellite Sputnik 1 , and used his influence to ensure passage of the 1958 National Aeronautics and Space Act, which established the civilian space agency NASA. President Johnson endeavors to give The Treatment to Senator Richard Russell in 1963 Historians Caro and Dallek consider Lyndon Johnson the most effective Senate majority leader in history. He was unusually proficient at gathering information. One biographer suggests he was the greatest intelligence gatherer Washington has ever known, discovering exactly where every Senator stood on issues, his philosophy and prejudices, his strengths and weaknesses and what it took to get his vote.Woods 2006, p. 262. Robert Baker claimed that Johnson would occasionally send senators on NATO trips in order to avoid their dissenting votes. Central to Johnsons control was The Treatment, described by two journalists A 60cigaretteperday smoker, Johnson suffered a nearfatal heart attack on July 2, 1955. He abruptly gave up smoking as a result, with only a couple of exceptions, and did not resume the habit until he left the White House on January 20, 1969. Vice Presidency Nomination Johnsons success in the Senate rendered him a potential Democratic presidential candidate he had been the favorite son candidate of the Texas delegation at the Partys national convention in 1956, and appeared to be in a strong position to run for the 1960 nomination. Jim Rowe repeatedly urged Johnson to launch a campaign in early 1959, but Johnson thought it better to wait, thinking that John Kennedys efforts would create a division in the ranks which could then be exploited. Rowe finally joined the Humphrey campaign in frustration, another move which Johnson thought played into his own strategy.Dallek 1991, pp. 544 545. Johnsons late entry into the campaign in July 1960, coupled with a reluctance to leave Washington, allowed the rival Kennedy campaign to secure a substantial early advantage among Democratic state party officials. Johnson underestimated Kennedys endearing qualities of charm and intelligence, as compared to his own reputation as the more crude and wheelingdealing Landslide Lyndon.Dallek 1991, p. 560. Caro suggests that Johnsons hesitancy was the result of an overwhelming fear of failure.Caro 2012, Part I . Johnson attempted in vain to capitalize on Kennedys youth, poor health, and failure to take a position regarding Joseph McCarthy.Dallek 1991, p. 570. He had formed a Stop Kennedy coalition with Adlai Stevenson, Stuart Symington, and Hubert Humphrey, but it proved a failure. Johnson received 409 votes on the only ballot at the Democratic convention, which nominated John F. Kennedy. Tip ONeill was a representative from Kennedys home state of Massachusetts at that time, and he recalled that Johnson approached him at the convention and said, Tip, I know you have to support Kennedy at the start, but Id like to have you with me on the second ballot. ONeill replied, Senator, theres not going to be any second ballot. According to Kennedys Special Counsel Myer Feldman and to Kennedy himself, it is impossible to reconstruct the precise manner in which Johnsons vicepresidential nomination ultimately took place. Kennedy did realize that he could not be elected without support of traditional Southern Democrats, most of whom had backed Johnson nevertheless, labor leaders were unanimous in their opposition to Johnson. After much back and forth with party leaders and others on the matter, Kennedy did offer Johnson the vicepresidential nomination at the Los Angeles Biltmore Hotel at 1015am on July 14, the morning after he was nominated, and Johnson accepted. From that point to the actual nomination that evening, the facts are in dispute in many respects. Dallek 1991, pp. 578 582. Seymour Hersh stated that Robert F. Kennedy hated Johnson for his personal attacks on the Kennedy family, and later maintained that his brother offered the position to Johnson merely as a courtesy, expecting him to decline. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. concurred with Robert Kennedys version of events, and put forth that John Kennedy would have preferred Stuart Symington as his runningmate, alleging that Johnson teamed with House Speaker Sam Rayburn and pressured Kennedy to favor Johnson.Seymour M. Hersh, The Dark Side of Camelot , 1997, Chapter 12. Biographer Robert Caro offered a different perspective he wrote that the Kennedy campaign was desperate to win what was forecast to be a very close election against Richard Nixon and Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.. Johnson was needed on the ticket to help carry Texas and the Southern states. Caros research showed that on July 14, John Kennedy started the process while Johnson was still asleep. At 630am, John Kennedy asked Robert Kennedy to prepare an estimate of upcoming electoral votes including Texas.Caro 2012, pp. 121 135. Robert called Pierre Salinger and Kenneth ODonnell to assist him. Salinger realized the ramifications of counting Texas votes as their own, and asked him whether he was considering a KennedyJohnson ticket, and Robert replied yes. Caro contends that it was then that John Kennedy called Johnson to arrange a meeting he also called Pennsylvania governor David L. Lawrence, a Johnson backer, to request that he nominate Johnson for vice president if Johnson were to accept the role. According to Caro, Kennedy and Johnson met and Johnson said that Kennedy would have trouble with Kennedy supporters who were anti Johnson. Kennedy returned to his suite to announce the KennedyJohnson ticket to his closest supporters, including northern political bosses. ODonnell was angry at what he considered a betrayal by Kennedy, who had previously cast Johnson as antilabor and antiliberal. Afterward, Robert Kennedy visited labor leaders who were extremely unhappy with the choice of Johnson and, after seeing the depth of labor opposition to Johnson, Robert ran messages between the hotel suites of his brother and Johnson apparently trying to undermine the proposed ticket without John Kennedys authorization. Caro continues in his analysis that Robert Kennedy tried to get Johnson to agree to be the Democratic Party chairman rather than vice president. Johnson refused to accept a change in plans unless it came directly from John Kennedy. Despite his brothers interference, John Kennedy was firm that Johnson was who he wanted as running mate he met with staffers such as Larry OBrien, his national campaign manager, to say that Johnson was to be vice president. OBrien recalled later that John Kennedys words were wholly unexpected, but that after a brief consideration of the electoral vote situation, he thought it was a stroke of genius. When John and Robert Kennedy next saw their father Joe Kennedy, he told them that signing Johnson as running mate was the smartest thing that they had ever done.Caro 2012, p. 142. At the same time as his vice presidential run, Johnson also sought a third term in the U.S. Senate. According to Robert Caro, On November 8, 1960, Lyndon Johnson won election for both the vice presidency of the United States, on the KennedyJohnson ticket, and for a third term as senator . When he won the vice presidency, he made arrangements to resign from the Senate, as he was required to do under federal law, as soon as it convened on January 3, 1961.Caro 2002, p. 1035. Johnson was reelected Senator with 1,306,605 votes to Republican John Towers 927,653 . Fellow Democrat William A. Blakley was appointed to replace Johnson as Senator, but Blakley lost a special election in May 1961 to Tower. Office President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson stroll outside the White House prior to a ceremony After the election, Johnson was quite concerned about the traditionally ineffective nature of his new office, and set about to assume authority not allotted to the position. He initially sought a transfer of the authority of Senate majority leader to the vice presidency, since that office made him president of the Senate, but faced vehement opposition from the Democratic Caucus, including members whom he had counted as his supporters. Johnson sought to increase his influence within the executive branch. He drafted an executive order for Kennedys signature, granting Johnson general supervision over matters of national security, and requiring all government agencies to cooperate fully with the vice president in the carrying out of these assignments. Kennedys response was to sign a nonbinding letter requesting Johnson to review national security policies instead.Caro 2012, pp. 170 171. Kennedy similarly turned down early requests from Johnson to be given an office adjacent to the Oval Office, and to employ a fulltime Vice Presidential staff within the White House.Caro 2012, p. 172. His lack of influence was thrown into relief later in 1961 when Kennedy appointed Johnsons friend Sarah T. Hughes to a federal judgeship, whereas Johnson had tried and failed to garner the nomination for Hughes at the beginning of his vice presidency. House Speaker Sam Rayburn wrangled the appointment from Kennedy in exchange for support of an administration bill. Moreover, many members of the Kennedy White House were contemptuous of Johnson, including the presidents brother, Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, and they ridiculed his comparatively brusque, crude manner. Congressman Tip ONeill recalled that the Kennedy men had a disdain for Johnson that they didnt even try to hide....They actually took pride in snubbing him. Opening Day of 1961 baseball season. President Kennedy throws out the first ball at Griffith Stadium, the home field of the Washington Senators, as LBJ and Hubert Humphrey look on. Kennedy, however, made efforts to keep Johnson busy, informed, and at the White House often, telling aides, I cant afford to have my vice president, who knows every reporter in Washington, going around saying were all screwed up, so were going to keep him happy.Caro 2012, p. 176. Kennedy appointed him to jobs such as head of the Presidents Committee on Equal Employment Opportunities, through which he worked with African Americans and other minorities. Kennedy may have intended this to remain a more nominal position, but Taylor Branch in Pillar of Fire contends that Johnson pushed the Kennedy administrations actions further and faster for civil rights than Kennedy originally intended to go. Branch notes the irony of Johnson being the advocate for civil rights, when the Kennedy family had hoped that he would appeal to conservative southern voters. In particular, he notes Johnsons Memorial Day 1963 speech at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania as being a catalyst that led to more action. Johnson took on numerous minor diplomatic missions, which gave him limited insights into global issues, as well as opportunities at selfpromotion in the name of showing the countrys flag. He attended Cabinet and National Security Council meetings. Kennedy gave Johnson control over all presidential appointments involving Texas, and appointed him chairman of the Presidents Ad Hoc Committee for Science.Dallek 1998, p. 15. Kennedy also appointed Johnson Chairman of the National Aeronautics Space Council. The Soviets beat the US with the first manned spaceflight in April 1961, and Kennedy gave Johnson the task of evaluating the state of the US space program and recommending a project that would allow the US to catch up or beat the Soviets.Kennedy to Johnson, Memorandum for Vice President, April 20, 1961. Johnson responded with a recommendation that the US gain the leadership role by committing the resources to embark on a project to land an American on the Moon in the 1960s.Johnson to Kennedy, Evaluation of Space Program, April 28, 1961.Ben Evans, Foothold in the Heavens The Seventies p. 193. Kennedy assigned priority to the space program, but Johnsons appointment provided potential cover in case of a failure.Dallek 1998, p. 16. Johnson was touched by a Senate scandal in August 1963 when Bobby Baker, the Secretary to the Majority Leader of the Senate and a protg of Johnsons, came under investigation by the Senate Rules Committee for allegations of bribery and financial malfeasance. One witness alleged that Baker had arranged for the witness to give kickbacks for the Vice President. Baker resigned in October, and the investigation did not expand to Johnson. The negative publicity from the affair fed rumors in Washington circles that Kennedy was planning on dropping Johnson from the Democratic ticket in the upcoming 1964 presidential election. However, on October 31, 1963, a reporter asked if he intended and expected to have Johnson on the ticket the following year. Kennedy replied, Yes to both those questions.Kennedy Denied Talk of Dropping Johnson. The New York Times , November 23, 1963, p. 9. There is little doubt that Robert Kennedy and Johnson hated each other,Jeff Shesol, Mutual Contempt Lyndon Johnson, Robert Kennedy and the Feud that Defined a Decade . yet John and Robert Kennedy agreed that dropping Johnson from the ticket could produce heavy losses in the South in the 1964 election, and they agreed that Johnson would stay on the ticket.Dallek 1998, pp. 42 44Sean J. Savage, JFK, LBJ, and the Democratic Party pp. 196 97. Presidency LBJ is sworn in on Air Force One by Judge Sarah Hughes as Mrs. Johnson and Mrs. Kennedy look on Johnsons presidency took place during a healthy economy, with steady growth and low unemployment. Regarding the rest of the world, there were no serious controversies with major countries. Attention therefore focused on domestic policy, and, after 1966, on the Vietnam War. Succession Johnson was quickly sworn in as President on Air Force One in Dallas on November 22, 1963, just 2 hours and 8 minutes after John F. Kennedy was assassinated, amid suspicions of a conspiracy against the government. He was sworn in by U.S. District Judge Sarah T. Hughes, a family friend. In the rush, a Bible was not at hand, so Johnson took the oath of office using a Roman Catholic missal from President Kennedys desk.Transcript, Lawrence F. OBrien Oral History Interview XIII, 91086, by Michael L. Gillette, Internet Copy, Johnson Library. See Page 23 at Cecil Stoughtons iconic photograph of Johnson taking the presidential oath of office as Mrs. Kennedy looks on is the most famous photo ever taken aboard a presidential aircraft. He was convinced of the need to make an immediate transition of power after the assassination to provide stability to a grieving nation in shock. He and the Secret Service were concerned that he could also be a target of a conspiracy, and felt compelled to rapidly remove the new president from Dallas and return him to Washington. This was greeted by some with assertions that Johnson was in too much haste to assume power.Dallek 1998, pp. 49 51 In the days following the assassination, Lyndon B. Johnson made an address to Congress saying that No memorial oration or eulogy could more eloquently honor President Kennedys memory than the earliest possible passage of the Civil Rights Bill for which he fought so long. The wave of national grief following the assassination gave enormous momentum to Johnsons promise to carry out Kennedys plans and his policy of seizing Kennedys legacy to give momentum to his legislative agenda. On November 29, 1963 just one week after Kennedys assassination, Johnson issued an executive order to rename NASAs Apollo Launch Operations Center and the NASAAir Force Cape Canaveral launch facilities as the John F. Kennedy Space Center. Cape Canaveral was officially known as Cape Kennedy from 19631973. Johnson was alert to the public demand for answers. To head off snowballing speculation about such conspiracies, he immediately created a panel headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren, known as the Warren Commission, to investigate Kennedys assassination.Dallek 1998, p. 51 The commission conducted extensive research and hearings and unanimously concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in the assassination. Conspiracy theorists were not satisfied and they stayed active.Robert D. Chapman, The Kennedy Assassination 50 Years Later. International Journal of Intelligence and CounterIntelligence 273 pp. 615 619. Johnson retained senior Kennedy appointees, some for the full term of his presidency. He even retained Robert Kennedy as Attorney General, with whom he had a notoriously difficult relationship. Robert Kennedy remained in office for a few months until leaving in 1964 to run for the Senate.Dallek 1998, p. 58. Although Johnson had no official chief of staff, Walter Jenkins was the first among a handful of equals and presided over the details of daily operations at the White House. George Reedy, who was Johnsons secondlongestserving aide, assumed the post of press secretary when John F. Kennedys own Pierre Salinger left that post in March 1964.Dallek 1998, p. 66. Horace Busby was another triplethreat man, as Johnson referred to his aides. He served primarily as a speech writer and political analyst.Dallek 1998, p. 67. Bill Moyers was the youngest member of Johnsons staff. He handled scheduling and speechwriting parttime.Dallek 1998, p. 68. Rapid legislative initiatives The new president thought it advantageous to quickly pursue one of Kennedys primary legislative goals a tax cut. Johnson worked closely with Harry F. Byrd of Virginia to negotiate a reduction in the budget below 100 billion in exchange for what became overwhelming Senate approval of the Revenue Act of 1964. Congressional approval followed at the end of February, and facilitated efforts to follow on civil rights.Dallek 1998, pp. 73 74. In late 1963 Johnson also launched the initial offensive of his War on Poverty, recruiting Kennedy relative Sargent Shriver, then head of the Peace Corps, to spearhead the effort. In March 1964, LBJ sent to Congress the Economic Opportunity Act, which created the Job Corps and the Community Action Program, designed to attack poverty locally. The act also created VISTA, Volunteers in Service to America, a domestic counterpart to the Peace Corps.Dallek 1998, pp. 76 80. Civil Rights Movement Meeting with civil rights leaders Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. , Whitney Young, and James Farmer in the Oval Office in 1964 President Kennedy had submitted a civilrights bill to Congress in June 1963, which was met with strong opposition.Reeves 1993, pp. 521 523 Johnson renewed the effort and asked Bobby Kennedy to spearhead the undertaking for the administration on Capitol Hill. This provided adequate political cover for Johnson should the effort fail but if it were successful, Johnson would receive ample credit.Dallek 1998, p. 115 Historian Robert Caro notes that the bill Kennedy had submitted was facing the same tactics that prevented the passage of civil rights bills in the past southern congressmen and senators used congressional procedure to prevent it from coming to a vote.Caro, Robert. The Passage of Power. p. 459 In particular, they held up all of the major bills Kennedy had proposed and that were considered urgent, especially the tax reform bill, in order to force the bills supporters to pull it. Johnson was quite familiar with the procedural tactic, as he played a role in a similar tactic against the civil rights bill that Harry Truman had submitted to congress fifteen years earlier. In that fight, a rentcontrol renewal bill was held up until the civilrights bill was withdrawn. Believing that the current course meant that the Civil Rights Act would suffer the same fate, he adopted a different strategy from that of Kennedy, who had mostly removed himself from the legislative process. By tackling the tax cut first, the previous tactic was eliminated.Caro, Robert. The Passage of Power. p. 460 Passing the civil rights bill in the house required getting it through the Rules Committee, which had been holding it up in an attempt to kill it. Johnson decided on a campaign to use a discharge petition to force it onto the house floor.Caro, Robert. The Passage of Power. p. 462 Facing a growing threat that they would be bypassed, the House rules committee approved the bill and moved it to the floor of the full house, which passed it shortly thereafter by a vote of 290 110.Dallek 1998, p. 116. In the Senate, since the tax bill had passed three days earlier, the anticivilrights senators were left with the filibuster as their only remaining tool. Overcoming the filibuster required the support of over twenty Republicans, who were growing less supportive due to the fact that their party was about to nominate for president a candidate who opposed the bill.Caro, Robert. The Passage of Power. p. 463 According to Caro, it was ultimately Johnsons ability to convince Republican leader Everett Dirksen to support the bill that amassed the necessary Republican votes to overcome the filibuster in March 1964 after 75 hours of debate, the bill passed the senate by a vote of 71 29.Caro, Robert. The Passage of Power. p. 465 Johnson signed the fortified Civil Rights Act of 1964 into law on July 2. Legend has it that the evening after signing the bill, Johnson told an aide, I think we just delivered the South to the Republican party for a long time to come, anticipating a coming backlash from Southern whites against Johnsons Democratic Party.Dallek 1998, p. 120. Biographer Randall B. Woods has argued that Johnson effectively used appeals to JudeoChristian ethics to garner support for the civil rights law. Woods writes that Johnson undermined the Southern filibuster against the bill Woods states that Johnsons religiosity ran deep At 15 he joined the Disciples of Christ, or Christian, church and would forever believe that it was the duty of the rich to care for the poor, the strong to assist the weak, and the educated to speak for the inarticulate.Woods, The Politics of Idealism p 3. Johnson shared the beliefs of his mentor, FDR, in that he paired liberal values to religious values, believing that freedom and social justice served both God and man.Woods, Prisoners of Hope p 90. The Great Society Johnson wanted a catchy slogan for the 1964 campaign to describe his proposed domestic agenda for 1965. Eric Goldman, who joined the White House in December of that year, thought Johnsons domestic program was best captured in the title of Walter Lippmans book, The Good Society . Richard Goodwin tweaked it to The Great Society and incorporated this in detail as part of a speech for Johnson in May 1964 at the University of Michigan. It encompassed movements of urban renewal, modern transportation, clean environment, antipoverty, healthcare reform, crime control, and educational reform.Dallek 1998, pp. 81 82. 1964 presidential election In Spring 1964, Johnson did not look optimistically upon the prospect of being elected president in his own right.Dallek 1998, p. 127. A pivotal change took place in April when he assumed personal management of negotiations between the railroad brotherhood and the railroad industry over the issue of featherbedding. Johnson emphasized to the parties the potential impact upon the economy of a strike. After considerable horse trading, especially with the carriers who won promises from the president for greater freedom in setting rights and more liberal depreciation allowances by the IRS, Johnson got an agreement. This substantially boosted his selfconfidence as well as his image.Dallek 1998, pp. 124 126. That same year, Robert F. Kennedy was widely considered an impeccable choice to run as Johnsons vice presidential running mate but Johnson and Kennedy however had never liked one another and Johnson, afraid that Kennedy would be credited with his election as president, abhorred the idea and opposed it at every turn.Dallek 1998, pp. 135 137. Kennedy was himself undecided about the position and, knowing that the prospect rankled Johnson, was content in refusing to eliminate himself from consideration. Ultimately, Goldwaters poor polling numbers degraded any dependence Johnson might have had on Kennedy as his running mate.Dallek 1998, pp. 140 142. Hubert Humphreys selection as vice president then became a foregone conclusion, and was thought to strengthen Johnson in the Midwest and industrial Northeast.Dallek 1998, p. 157. Johnson, knowing full well the degree of frustration inherent in the office of vice president, put Humphrey through a gauntlet of interviews to guarantee his absolute loyalty and having made the decision, he kept the announcement from the press until the last moment to maximize media speculation and coverage.Dallek 1998, pp. 157 59. In preparation for the Democratic convention, Johnson requested the FBI send a squad of 30 agents to cover convention activities the objective of the squad was to inform the White House staff of any disruptive activities on the floor. The squads focus narrowed upon the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party delegation, which sought to displace the white segregationist delegation regularly selected in the state. The squads activities also included wiretaps of Martin Luther Kings room as well as the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and the Congress of Racial Equality . From beginning to end, the squads assignment was carefully couched in terms of the monitoring of disruptive activities that might endanger the president and other highranking officials.Dallek 1998, pp. 161 163. 1964 presidential election results In fact, Johnson was very concerned about potential political damage from media coverage of racial tensions exposed by a credentials fight between the MFDP and the segregationist delegation, and he assigned Humphrey the job of managing the problem.Dallek 1998, p. 164. The conventions Credentials Committee declared that two MFDP delegates in the delegation be seated as observers and agreed to bar future delegations from states where any citizens are deprived of the right to vote by reason of their race or color.Dallek 1998, p. 165 The MFDP rejected the committees ruling. The convention became the apparent personal triumph that Johnson craved, but a sense of betrayal caused by the marginalization of the MFDP would trigger disaffection with Johnson and the Democratic Party from the left SNCC chairman John Lewis would call it a turning point in the civil rights movement. Full Daisy advertisement Early in the 1964 presidential campaign, Barry Goldwater appeared to be a strong contender, with strong support from the South, which threatened Johnsons position as he had predicted in reaction to the passage of the Civil Rights Act. However, Goldwater lost momentum as his campaign progressed. On September 7, 1964, Johnsons campaign managers broadcast the Daisy ad. It portrayed a little girl picking petals from a daisy, counting up to ten. Then a baritone voice took over, counted down from ten to zero and the visual showed the explosion of a nuclear bomb. The message conveyed was that electing Goldwater president held the danger of a nuclear war. Goldwaters campaign message was best symbolized by the bumper sticker displayed by supporters claiming In your heart, you know hes right.. Opponents captured the spirit of Johnsons campaign with bumper stickers that said In your heart, you know he might and In your gut, you know hes nuts.Dallek 1998, p. 170. Johnson won the presidency by a landslide with 61.05percent of the vote, making it the highest ever share of the popular vote.Leip, David. Dave Leips Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections At the time, this was also the widest popular margin in the 20th century more than 15.95million votes this was later surpassed by incumbent President Nixons victory in 1972.Dallek 1998, p. 182. In the Electoral College, Johnson defeated Goldwater by margin of 486 to 52. Johnson won 44 states, compared to Goldwaters six. Voters also gave Johnson the largest majorities in Congress since FDRs election in 1936 a Senate with a 68 32 majority and a house with a 295 140 Democratic margin.Dallek 1998, p. 184. Voting Rights Act Johnson began his elected presidential term with similar motives as he had upon succeeding to the office, ready to carry forward the plans and programs of John Fitzgerald Kennedy. Not because of our sorrow or sympathy, but because they are right. He was reticent to push southern congressmen even further after passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and suspected their support may have been temporarily tapped out. Nevertheless, the Selma to Montgomery marches in Alabama led by Martin Luther King ultimately led Johnson to initiate debate on a voting rights bill in February 1965.Dallek 1998, p. 215. Johnson gave a congressional speech Dallek considers it his greatest in which he said rarely at anytime does an issue lay bare the secret heart of America itself rarely are we met with the challenge to the values and the purposes and the meaning of our beloved nation. The issue of equal rights for American Negroes is such an issue. And should we defeat every enemy, should we double our wealth and conquer the stars, and still be unequal to this issue, then we will have failed as a people and as a nation.Dallek 1998, p. 218. In 1965, he achieved passage of a second civil rights bill called the Voting Rights Act, which outlawed discrimination in voting thus allowing millions of southern blacks to vote for the first time. In accordance with the act, several states, seven of the eleven southern states of the former confederacy were subjected to the procedure of preclearance in 1965 while Texas, home to the majority of the African American population at the time, followed in 1975.Davidson, C. Grofman, B. . Quiet Revolution in the South The Impact Of The Voting Right Act, 1965 1990 . p. 3, Princeton University Press. The Senate passed the voting rights bill by a vote of 7719 just after 2 12 months and won passage in the house in July, by 333 85. The results were significant between the years of 1968 and 1980, the number of southern black elected state and federal officeholders nearly doubled. The act also made a large difference in the numbers of black elected officials nationally in 1965, a few hundred black officeholders mushroomed to 6,000 in 1989. President Lyndon B. Johnson, Martin Luther King Jr., and Rosa Parks at the signing of the Voting Rights Act on August 6, 1965 After the murder of civil rights worker Viola Liuzzo, Johnson went on television to announce the arrest of four Ku Klux Klansmen implicated in her death. He angrily denounced the Klan as a hooded society of bigots, and warned them to return to a decent society before its too late. Johnson was the first President to arrest and prosecute members of the Klan since Ulysses S. Grant about 93 years earlier.President Grant, on October 17, 1871 suspended Habeas Corpus in 9 South Carolina counties, sent in troops, and prosecuted the Klan in the federal district court. McFeely , Grant A Biography , pp. 369 371. He turned to themes of Christian redemption to push for civil rights, thereby mobilizing support from churches North and South.Woods 2006, pp. 759 787. At the Howard University commencement address on June 4, 1965, he said that both the government and the nation needed to help achieve goals, To shatter forever not only the barriers of law and public practice, but the walls which bound the condition of many by the color of his skin. To dissolve, as best we can, the antique enmities of the heart which diminish the holder, divide the great democracy, and do wrong great wrong to the children of God... Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965. Volume II, entry 301, pp. 635 640 In 1967, Johnson nominated civil rights attorney Thurgood Marshall to be the first African American Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. To head the new Department of Housing and Urban Development, Johnson appointed Robert C. Weaver the first AfricanAmerican cabinet secretary in any U.S. presidential administration. In 1968 Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1968, which provided for equal housing opportunities regardless of race, creed, or national origin. The impetus for the laws passage came from the 1966 Chicago Open Housing Movement, the April 4, 1968 assassination of Martin Luther King,Jr., and the civil unrest across the country following Kings death. On April 5, Johnson wrote a letter to the United States House of Representatives urging passage of the Fair Housing Act. With newly urgent attention from legislative director Joseph Califano and Democratic Speaker of the House John McCormack, the bill passed the House by a wide margin on April 10. Immigration President Johnson signs the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 as Sen. Edward Kennedy, Sen. Robert Kennedy, and others look on. With the passage of the sweeping Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, the countrys immigration system was reformed and all national origins quotas dating from the 1920s were removed. The annual rate of inflow doubled between 1965 and 1970, and doubled again by 1990, with dramatic increases from Asia and Mexico. Scholars give Johnson little credit for the law, which was not one of his priorities he had supported the McCarrenWalters Act of 1952 that was unpopular with reformers. Federal funding for education Johnson, whose own ticket out of poverty was a public education in Texas, fervently believed that education was a cure for ignorance and poverty, and was an essential component of the American dream, especially for minorities who endured poor facilities and tightfisted budgets from local taxes.Bernstein 1996, pp. 183 213. He made education the top priority of the Great Society agenda, with an emphasis on helping poor children. After the 1964 landslide brought in many new liberal Congressmen, LBJ launched a legislative effort which took the name of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965. The bill sought to double federal spending on education from 4 billion to 8 billion.Dallek 1988, pp. 195 198. with considerable facilitating by the White House, it passed the House by a vote of 263 to 153 on March 26 and then it remarkably passed without change in the Senate, by 73 to 8, without going through the usual conference committee. This was an historic accomplishment by the president, with the billion dollar bill passing as introduced just 87 days before.Dallek 1988, pp. 200 201. For the first time, large amounts of federal money went to public schools. In practice ESEA meant helping all public school districts, with more money going to districts that had large proportions of students from poor families .Bernstein 1996, p. 195. For the first time private schools received services, such as library funding, comprising about 12percent of the ESEA budget. Though federal funds were involved, they were administered by local officials, and by 1977 it was reported that less than half of the funds were actually applied toward the education of children under the poverty line. Dallek further reports that researchers cited by Hugh Davis Graham soon found that poverty had more to do with family background and neighborhood conditions than the quantity of education a child received. Early studies suggested initial improvements for poor children helped by ESEA reading and math programs, but later assessments indicated that benefits faded quickly and left pupils little better off than those not in the schemes. Johnsons second major education program was the Higher Education Act of 1965, which focused on funding for lower income students, including grants, workstudy money, and government loans. Although ESEA solidified Johnsons support among K12 teachers unions, neither the Higher Education Act nor the new endowments mollified the college professors and students growing increasingly uneasy with the war in Vietnam.Woods 2006, pp. 563 68 Dallek 1988, pp. 196 202. In 1967, Johnson signed the Public Broadcasting Act to create educational television programs to supplement the broadcast networks. In 1965, Johnson also set up the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Arts, to support academic subjects such as literature, history, and law, and arts such as music, painting, and sculpture . War on Poverty and healthcare reform Former president Truman and wife Bess at Medicare Bill signing in 1965, as Lady Bird and Hubert Humphrey look on In 1964, at Johnsons request, Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1964 and the Economic Opportunity Act, as part of the war on poverty. Johnson set in motion legislation creating programs such as Head Start, food stamps and Work Study. During Johnsons years in office, national poverty declined significantly, with the percentage of Americans living below the poverty line dropping from 23 percent to 12 percent. Johnson took an additional step in the War on Poverty with an urban renewal effort, presenting to Congress in January 1966 the Demonstration Cities Program. To be eligible a city would need to demonstrate its readiness to arrest blight and decay and make substantial impact on the development of its entire city. Johnson requested an investment of 400 million per year totaling 2.4 billion. In the fall of 1966 the Congress passed a substantially reduced program costing 900 million, which Johnson later called the Model Cities Program. Changing the name had little effect on the success of the bill the New York Times wrote 22 years later that the program was for the most part a failure.Dallek 1998, pp. 320 322. Johnsons initial effort to improve healthcare was the creation of The Commission on Heart Disease, Cancer and Strokes . Combined, these diseases accounted for 71 percent of the nations deaths in 1962.Dallek 1998, p. 204 To enact recommendations of the commission, Johnson asked Congress for funds to set up the Regional Medical Program , to create a network of hospitals with federally funded research and practice Congress passed a significantly watered down version. As a backup position, in 1965 Johnson turned his focus to hospital insurance for the aged under Social Security.Dallek 1998, p. 205. The key player in initiating this program, named Medicare, was Wilbur Mills, Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. In order to reduce Republican opposition, Mills suggested that Medicare be fashioned as a three layer cake hospital insurance under Social Security, a voluntary insurance program for doctor visits and an expanded medical welfare program for the poor, known as Medicaid.Dallek 1998, p. 208. The bill passed the house by a margin of 110 votes on April 8. The effort in the Senate was considerably more complicated however, the Medicare bill passed Congress on July 28 after negotiation in a conference committee.Dallek 1998, p. 209. Medicare now covers tens of millions of Americans. Johnson gave the first two Medicare cards to former President Harry S Truman and his wife Bess after signing the Medicare bill at the Truman Library in Independence, Missouri.Patricia P. Martin and David A. Weaver. Social Security A Program and Policy History, Social Security Bulletin , volume 66, no. 1 , see also online version. Transportation In March 1965, Johnson sent to Congress a transportation message which included the creation of a new Transportation Department which would include the Commerce Departments Office of Transportation, the Bureau of Public Roads, the Federal Aviation Agency, the Coast Guard, the Maritime Administration, the Civil Aeronautics Board and the Interstate Commerce Commission. The bill passed the Senate after some negotiation over navigation projects in the house, passage required negotiation over maritime interests and the bill was signed October 15, 1965.Dallek 1998, pp. 315 316. Gun control On October 22, 1968, Lyndon Johnson signed the Gun Control Act of 1968, one of the largest and farthestreaching federal gun control laws in American history. Much of the motivation for this large expansion of federal gun regulations came as a response to the assassinations of John F. Kennedy, Robert F. Kennedy, and Martin Luther King Jr. Space program During Johnsons administration, NASA conducted the Gemini manned space program, developed the Saturn V rocket and its launch facility, and prepared to make the first manned Apollo program flights. On January 27, 1967, the nation was stunned when the entire crew of Apollo 1 was killed in a cabin fire during a spacecraft test on the launch pad, stopping Apollo in its tracks. Rather than appointing another Warrenstyle commission, Johnson accepted Administrator James E. Webbs request for NASA to do its own investigation, holding itself accountable to Congress and the President. Johnson maintained his staunch support of Apollo through Congressional and press controversy, and the program recovered. The first two manned missions, Apollo 7 and the first manned flight to the Moon, Apollo 8, were completed by the end of Johnsons term. He congratulated the Apollo 8 crew, saying, Youve taken ... all of us, all over the world, into a new era. On July 16, 1969, Johnson attended the launch of the first Moon landing mission Apollo 11, becoming the first former or incumbent US president to witness a rocket launch. Urban riots Aftermath from a race riot in Washington D.C., April 1968 Major riots in black neighborhoods caused a series of long hot summers. They started with a violent disturbance in the Harlem riots in 1964, and the Watts district of Los Angeles in 1965, and extended to 1971. The momentum for the advancement of civil rights came to a sudden halt in the summer of 1965, with the riots in Watts. After 34 people were killed and 35 million in property was damaged, the public feared an expansion of the violence to other cities, and so the appetite for additional programs in LBJs agenda was lost.Dallek 1998, pp. 222 223. Newark burned in 1967, where six days of rioting left 26 dead, 1500 injured, and the inner city a burned out shell. In Detroit in 1967, Governor George Romney sent in 7400 national guard troops to quell fire bombings, looting, and attacks on businesses and on police. Johnson finally sent in federal troops with tanks and machine guns. Detroit continued to burn for three more days until finally 43 were dead, 2250 were injured, 4000 were arrested property damage ranged into the hundreds of millions. The biggest wave of riots came in April 1968 in over a hundred cities after the assassination of Martin Luther King. Johnson called for even more billions to be spent in the cities and another federal civil rights law regarding housing, but this fell on deaf ears. Johnsons popularity plummeted as a massive white political backlash took shape, reinforcing the sense Johnson had lost control of the streets of major cities as well as his party.Woods, Randall , pp. 790 795 Michael W. Flamm. Law And Order Street Crime, Civil Unrest, and the Crisis of Liberalism in the 1960s . Johnson created the Kerner Commission to study the problem of urban riots, headed by Illinois Governor Otto Kerner. According to press secretary George Christian, Johnson was unsurprised by the riots, saying What did you expect I dont know why were so surprised. When you put your foot on a mans neck and hold him down for three hundred years, and then you let him up, whats he going to do Hes going to knock your block off. Backlash against Johnson 1966 67 Lady Bird Johnson and LBJ with Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos on September 12, 1966 In 1966 the press sensed a credibility gap between what Johnson was saying in press conferences and what was happening on the ground in Vietnam, which led to much less favorable coverage. By years end, the Democratic governor of Missouri, Warren E. Hearnes, warned that Johnson would lose the state by 100,000 votes, despite winning by a 500,000 margin in 1964. Frustration over Vietnam too much federal spending and... taxation no great public support for your Great Society programs and ... public disenchantment with the civil rights programs had eroded the Presidents standing, the governor reported. There were bright spots in January 1967, Johnson boasted that wages were the highest in history, unemployment was at a 13year low, and corporate profits and farm incomes were greater than ever a 4.5 percent jump in consumer prices was worrisome, as was the rise in interest rates. Johnson asked for a temporary 6 percent surcharge in income taxes to cover the mounting deficit caused by increased spending. Johnsons approval ratings stayed below 50 percent by January 1967, the number of his strong supporters had plunged to 16, from 25 percent four months before. He ran about even with Republican George Romney in trial matchups that spring. Asked to explain why he was unpopular, Johnson responded, I am a dominating personality, and when I get things done I dont always please all the people. Johnson also blamed the press, saying they showed complete irresponsibility and lie and misstate facts and have no one to be answerable to. He also blamed the preachers, liberals and professors who had turned against him.Dallek 1998, pp. 391 396 quotes on pp. 391 and 396. In the congressional elections of 1966, the Republicans gained three seats in the Senate and 47 in the House, reinvigorating the conservative coalition and making it more difficult for Johnson to pass any additional Great Society legislation. However, in the end Congress passed almost 96 percent of the administrations Great Society programs, which Johnson then signed into law. Vietnam War At Kennedys death, there were 16,000 American military personnel stationed in Vietnam these personnel supported South Vietnam in the Vietnam War against North Vietnam. Vietnam had been partitioned at the 1954 Geneva Conference into two countries, with North Vietnam led by a Communist government. Johnson subscribed to the Domino Theory in Vietnam and to a containment policy that required America to make a serious effort to stop all Communist expansion. On taking office, Johnson immediately reversed Kennedys order to withdraw 1,000 military personnel by the end of 1963.Reeves 1993, p. 613. In late summer 1964, Johnson seriously questioned the value of staying in Vietnam but, after meeting with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell D. Taylor, declared his readiness to do more when we had a base or when Saigon was politically more stable.Dallek 1998, p. 239. He expanded the numbers and roles of the American military following the Gulf of Tonkin Incident. 1964 In August 1964, allegations arose from the military that two US destroyers had been attacked by some North Vietnamese torpedo boats in international waters from the Vietnamese coast in the Gulf of Tonkin naval communications and reports of the attack were contradictory. Although Johnson very much wanted to keep discussions about Vietnam out of the 1964 election campaign, he felt forced to respond to the supposed aggression by the Vietnamese, so he sought and obtained from the Congress the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on August 7. Johnson, determined to embolden his image on foreign policy, also wanted to prevent criticism such as Truman had received in Korea by proceeding without congressional endorsement of military action a response to the purported attack as well blunted presidential campaign criticism of weakness from the hawkish Goldwater camp. The resolution gave congressional approval for use of military force by the commanderinchief to repel future attacks and also to assist members of SEATO requesting assistance. Johnson later in the campaign expressed assurance that the primary US goal remained the preservation of South Vietnamese independence through material and advice, as opposed to any US offensive posture.Dallek 1998, pp. 144 155 The publics reaction to the resolution at the time was positive 48 percent favored stronger measures in Vietnam and only 14 percent wanted to negotiate a settlement and leave.Dallek 1998, p. 157 In the 1964 presidential campaign, Johnson restated his determination to provide measured support for Vietnam while avoiding another Korea but privately he had a sense of foreboding about Vietnam a feeling that no matter what he did things would end badly. Indeed, his heart was on his Great Society agenda, and he even felt that his political opponents favored greater intervention in Vietnam in order to divert attention and resources away from his War on Poverty. The situation on the ground was aggravated in the fall by additional Viet Minh attacks on US ships in the Tonkin Gulf, as well as an attack on Bien Hoa Air Base in South Vietnam.Dallek 1998, p. 240. Johnson decided against retaliatory action at the time after consultation with the Joint Chiefs and also after public pollster Lou Harris confirmed that his decision would not detrimentally affect him at the polls.Dallek 1998, p. 241. By the end of 1964, there were approximately 23,000 military personnel in South Vietnam. U.S. casualties for 1964 totaled 1,278. In the winter of 1964 65 Johnson was pressured by the military to begin a bombing campaign to forcefully resist a communist takeover in South Vietnam moreover, a plurality in the polls at the time were in favor of military action against the communists, with only 26 to 30 percent opposed.Dallek 1998, p. 244. Johnson revised his priorities, and a new preference for stronger action came at the end of January with yet another change of government in Saigon. He then agreed with Mac Bundy and McNamara, that the continued passive role would only lead to defeat and withdrawal in humiliation. Johnson said, Stable government or no stable government in Saigon we will do what we ought to do. Im prepared to do that we will move strongly. General Nguyn Khnh is our boy.Dallek 1998, p. 247. 1965 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and General Westmoreland in Vietnam 1965 Johnson decided on a systematic bombing campaign in February after a ground report from Bundy recommending immediate US action to avoid defeat also, the Viet Cong had just killed eight US advisers and wounded dozens of others in an attack at Pleiku Air Base. The eightweek bombing campaign became known as Operation Rolling Thunder. Johnsons instructions for public consumption were clear there was to be no comment that the war effort had been expanded.Dallek 1998, p. 249. Long term estimates of the bombing campaign ranged from an expectation that Hanoi would rein in the Viet Cong to one of provoking Hanoi and the Viet Cong into an intensification of the war. But the shortterm expectations were consistent that the morale and stability of the South Vietnamese government would be bolstered. By limiting the information given out to the public and even to Congress, Johnson maximized his flexibility to change course.Dallek 1998, pp. 250 252. In March, Bundy began to urge the use of ground forces American air operations alone he counseled would not stop Hanois aggression against the South. Johnson approved an increase in logistical troops of 18,000 to 20,000, the deployment of two additional Marine battalions and a Marine air squadron, in addition to planning for the deployment of two more divisions and most importantly a change in mission from defensive to offensive operations nevertheless, he disobligingly continued to insist that this was not to be publicly represented as a change in existing policy.Dallek 1998, p. 255. Philippines President Marcos hosting the leaders of SEATO nations during the Manila Conference on the Vietnam War By the middle of June, the total US ground forces in Vietnam were increased to 82,000 or by 150 percent.Dallek 1998, p. 268. That same month, Ambassador Taylor reported that the bombing offensive against North Vietnam had been ineffective, and that the South Vietnamese army was outclassed and in danger of collapse.Dallek 1998, p. 270. Gen. Westmoreland shortly thereafter recommended the president further increase ground troops from 82,000 to 175,000. After consulting with his principals, Johnson, desirous of a low profile, chose to announce at a press conference an increase to 125,000 troops, with additional forces to be sent later upon request. Johnson described himself at the time as boxed in by unpalatable choices between sending Americans to die in Vietnam and giving in to the communists. If he sent additional troops he would be attacked as an interventionist and if he did not he thought he risked being impeached. He continued to insist that his decision did not imply any change in policy whatsoever. Of his desire to veil the decision, Johnson jested privately, If you have a motherinlaw with only one eye, and she has it in the center of her forehead, you dont keep her in the living room.Dallek 1998, pp. 272 277. By October 1965 there were over 200,000 troops deployed in Vietnam.Dallek 1998, p. 284. 1966 Awarding a medal to a US soldier during a visit to Vietnam in 1966 Public as well as political impatience with the war began to emerge in the spring of 1966. At the time, when Johnsons approval ratings were reaching new lows of 41 percent, Sen. Richard Russell, Chairman of the Armed Services Committee, reflected the national mood in June 1966, when he declared it was time to get it over or get out.Dallek 1998, p. 364. Johnson responded by saying to the press, we are trying to provide the maximum deterrence that we can to communist aggression with a minimum of cost.Dallek 1998, p. 365. In response to the intensified criticism of the war effort, Johnson employed the suspicion of communist subversion in the country, and press relations became strained.Dallek 1998, p. 366. Johnsons primary war policy opponent in Congress included among others the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, James William Fulbright.Dallek 1998, p. 369. The persistent Johnson began to seriously consider a more focused bombing campaign against petroleum, oil and lubrication facilities in North Vietnam in hopes of accelerating victory.Dallek 1998, pp. 372 373. Humphrey, Rusk and McNamara all agreed the bombing began the end of June.Dallek 1998, pp. 373 374. In July polling results indicated that Americans favored the bombing campaign by a 5 to 1 margin however, in August a Defense Department study indicated that the bombing campaign had little impact on North Vietnam.Dallek 1998, p. 376. In the fall of 1966 however, multiple sources began to report progress was being made against the North Vietnamese logistics and infrastructure Johnson was urged from every corner to begin peace discussions. There was no shortage of peace initiatives nevertheless, among protesters, English philosopher Bertrand Russell attacked Johnsons policy as a barbaric aggressive war of conquest and in June he initiated the International War Crimes Tribunal as a means to condemn the American effort.Dallek 1998, p. 380. The gap with Hanoi was an unbridgeable demand on both sides for a unilateral end to bombing and withdrawal of forces. In August, Johnson appointed Averell Harriman Ambassador for Peace to promote negotiations. Westmoreland and McNamara then recommended a concerted program to promote pacification Johnson formally placed this effort under military control in October.Dallek 1998, p. 381. Also in October 1966, to reassure and promote his war effort, Johnson initiated a meeting with allies in Manila the South Vietnamese, Thais, South Koreans, Filipinos, Australians and New Zealanders.Dallek 1998, p. 383. The conference ended with pronouncements to stand fast against communist aggression and to promote ideals of democracy and development in Vietnam and across Asia.Dallek 1998, p. 384. For Johnson it was a fleeting public relations success confirmed by a 63 percent Vietnam approval rating in November.Dallek 1998, p. 385. Nevertheless, in December Johnsons Vietnam approval rating was again back down in the 40s LBJ had become anxious to justify war casualties, and talked of the need for decisive victory, despite the unpopularity of the cause.Dallek 1998, p. 386. In a discussion about the war with former President Dwight Eisenhower on October 3, 1966, Johnson said he was trying to win it just as fast as I can in every way that I know how and later stated that he needed all the help I can get. By years end it was clear that current pacification efforts were ineffectual, as had been the air campaign. Johnson then agreed to McNamaras new recommendation to add 70,000 troops in 1967 to the 400,000 previously committed. While McNamara recommended no increase in the level of bombing, Johnson agreed with CIA recommendations to increase them.Dallek 1998, pp. 386 388. The increased bombing began despite initial secret talks being held in Saigon, Hanoi and Warsaw. While the bombing ended the talks, North Vietnamese intentions were not considered genuine.Dallek 1998, p. 390. 1967 Johnson talking with his Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, 1967 January and February 1967 included probes to detect North Vietnamese willingness to discuss peace, and all fell on deaf ears. Ho Chi Minh declared that the only solution was a unilateral withdrawal by the U.S.Dallek 1998, pp. 445 447. A Gallup poll taken in July 1967 showed 52 percent of the country disapproving of the presidents handling of the war and only 34 percent thought progress was being made.Dallek 1998, p. 474. Johnsons anger and frustration over the lack of a solution to Vietnam and its effect on him politically was exhibited in a statement to Robert F. Kennedy, who had become a prominent public critic of the war and loomed as a potential challenger in the 1968 presidential election.Dallek 1998, p. 461. Johnson had just received several reports predicting military progress by the summer, and warned Kennedy, Ill destroy you and every one of your dove friends in six months, he shouted. Youll be dead politically in six months.Dallek 1998, p. 447. McNamara offered Johnson a way out of Vietnam in May the administration could declare its objective in the war South Vietnams selfdetermination was being achieved and upcoming September elections in South Vietnam would provide the chance for a coalition government. The United States could reasonably expect that country to then assume responsibility for the election outcome. But Johnson was reluctant, in light of some optimistic reports, again of questionable reliability, which matched the negative assessments about the conflict and provided hope of improvement. The CIA was reporting wide food shortages in Hanoi and an unstable power grid, as well as military manpower reductions.Dallek 1998, pp. 463 464. By the middle of 1967 nearly 70,000 Americans had been killed or wounded in the war. In July, Johnson sent McNamara, Wheeler and other officials to meet with Westmoreland and reach agreement on plans for the immediate future. At that time the war was being commonly described by the press and others as a stalemate. Westmoreland said such a description was pure fiction, and that we are winning slowly but steadily and the pace can excel if we reinforce our successes.Dallek 1998, pp. 470 471. Though Westmoreland sought many more, Johnson agreed to an increase of 55,000 troops bringing the total to 525,000.Dallek 1998, p. 473. In August Johnson, with the Joint Chiefs support, decided to expand the air campaign and exempted only Hanoi, Haiphong and a buffer zone with China from the target list.Dallek 1998, p. 477. In September Ho Chi Minh and North Vietnamese premier Pham Van Dong appeared amenable to French mediation, so Johnson ceased bombing in a 10mile zone around Hanoi this was met with dissatisfaction. Johnson in a Texas speech agreed to halt all bombing if Ho Chi Minh would launch productive and meaningful discussions and if North Vietnam would not seek to take advantage of the halt this was named the San Antonio formula. There was no response, but Johnson pursued the possibility of negotiations with such a bombing pause.Dallek 1998, pp. 482 484. Washington, D.C. in October 1967support for the Vietnam War was dropping and the antiVietnam War movement strengthened. With the war still arguably in a stalemate and in light of the widespread disapproval of the conflict, Johnson convened a group called the Wise Men for a fresh, indepth look at the war Dean Acheson, Gen. Omar Bradley, George Ball, Mac Bundy, Arthur Dean, Douglas Dillon, Abe Fortas, Averell Harriman, Henry Cabot Lodge, Robert Murphy and Max Taylor.Dallek 1998, p. 494. At that time McNamara, reversing his position on the war, recommended that a cap of 525,000 be placed on the number of forces deployed and that the bombing be halted, since he could see no success. Johnson was quite agitated by this recommendation and McNamaras resignation soon followed.Dallek 1998, p. 495. With the exception of George Ball, the Wise Men all agreed the administration should press forward.Dallek 1998, p. 496. Johnson was confident that Hanoi would await the 1968 US election results before deciding to negotiate.Dallek 1998, p. 501. On June 23, 1967, Johnson traveled to Los Angeles for a Democratic fundraiser. Thousands of antiwar protesters tried to march past the hotel where he was speaking. The march was led by a coalition of peace protestors. However, a small group of Progressive Labor Party and SDS protestors activists placed themselves at the head of the march and, when they reached the hotel, staged a sitdown. Efforts by march monitors to keep the main body of the marchers moving were only partially successful. Hundreds of LAPD officers were massed at the hotel and when the march slowed an order was given to disperse the crowd. The Riot Act was read and 51 protestors arrested. This was one of the first massive war protests in the United States and the first in Los Angeles. Ending in a clash with riot police, it set a pattern for the massive protests which followed.Crowd Battles LAPD as War Protest Turns Violent, Due to the size and violence of this event, Johnson attempted no further public speeches in venues outside military bases. With the everincreasing public protests against the war, in October Johnson engaged the FBI and the CIA to investigate, monitor and undermine antiwar activists.Dallek 1998, pp. 486 487. In midOctober there was a demonstration of 100,000 at the Pentagon Johnson and Rusk were convinced that foreign communist sources were behind the demonstration, which was refuted by CIA findings.Dallek 1998, p. 489. 1968 Walt Whitman Rostow shows President Lyndon B. Johnson a model of the Khe Sanh area in February 1968 As casualties mounted and success seemed further away than ever, Johnsons popularity plummeted. College students and others protested, burned draft cards, and chanted, Hey, hey, LBJ, how many kids did you kill today Johnson could scarcely travel anywhere without facing protests, and was not allowed by the Secret Service to attend the 1968 Democratic National Convention, where thousands of hippies, yippies, Black Panthers and other opponents of Johnsons policies both in Vietnam and in the ghettos converged to protest.Frank Kusch, Battleground Chicago The Police and the 1968 Democratic National Convention , p. 62. Thus by 1968, the public was polarized, with the hawks rejecting Johnsons refusal to continue the war indefinitely, and the doves rejecting his current war policies. Support for Johnsons middle position continued to shrink until he finally rejected containment and sought a peace settlement. By late summer, he realized that Nixon was closer to his position than Humphrey. He continued to support Humphrey publicly in the election, and personally despised Nixon. One of Johnsons well known quotes was the Democratic party at its worst, is still better than the Republican party at its best.Gould 2010, p. 98. On January 30 came the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese Tet Offensive against South Vietnams five largest cities, including Saigon and the US embassy there and other government installations. While the Tet offensive failed militarily, it was a psychological victory, definitively turning American public opinion against the war effort. Iconically, Walter Cronkite of CBS news, voted the nations most trusted person in February expressed on the air that the conflict was deadlocked and that additional fighting would change nothing. Johnson reacted, saying If Ive lost Cronkite, Ive lost middle America.Dallek 1998, pp. 505 506. Indeed, demoralization about the war was everywhere 26 then approved of Johnsons handling of Vietnam 63 disapproved. Johnson agreed to increase the troop level by 22,000, despite a recommendation from the Joint Chiefs for ten times that number,Dallek 1998, p. 509. By March 1968 Johnson was secretly desperate for an honorable way out of the war. Clark Clifford, the new Defense Secretary, described the war as a loser and proposed to cut losses and get out.Dallek 1998, p. 511. On March 31 Johnson spoke to the nation of Steps to Limit the War in Vietnam. He then announced an immediate unilateral halt to the bombing of North Vietnam and announced his intention to seek out peace talks anywhere at any time. At the close of his speech he also announced, I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your President.Dallek 1998, p. 513. Tens of thousands of civilians were killed during the American bombing of North Vietnam in Operation Rolling Thunder. In March Johnson decided to restrict future bombing with the result that 90 percent of North Vietnams population and 75 percent of its territory was offlimits to bombing. In April he succeeded in opening discussions of peace talks and after extensive negotiations over the site, Paris was agreed to and talks began in May. When the talks failed to yield any results the decision was made to resort to private discussions in Paris.Dallek 1998, pp. 538 541. Two months later it was apparent that private discussions proved to be no more productive.Dallek 1998, p. 564. Despite recommendations in August from Harriman, Vance, Clifford and Bundy to halt bombing as an incentive for Hanoi to seriously engage in substantive peace talks, Johnson refused.Dallek 1998, p. 569. In October when the parties came close to an agreement on a bombing halt, Republican presidential nominee Richard Nixon intervened with the South Vietnamese, and made promises of better terms, so as to delay a settlement on the issue until after the election.Dallek 1998, pp. 584 585. After the election, Johnsons primary focus on Vietnam was to get Saigon to join the Paris peace talks. Ironically, only after Nixon added his urging did they do so. Even then they argued about procedural matters until after Nixon took office.Dallek 1998, p. 597. The SixDay War and Israel Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin next to Johnson during the Glassboro Summit Conference In a 1993 interview for the Johnson Presidential Library oral history archives, Johnsons Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara stated that a carrier battle group, the U.S. 6th Fleet, sent on a training exercise toward Gibraltar was repositioned back towards the eastern Mediterranean to be able to assist Israel during the SixDay War of June 1967. Given the rapid Israeli advances following their strike on Egypt, the administration thought the situation was so tense in Israel that perhaps the Syrians, fearing Israel would attack them, or the Soviets supporting the Syrians might wish to redress the balance of power and might attack Israel. The Soviets learned of this course correction and regarded it as an offensive move. In a hotline message from Moscow, Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin said, If you want war youre going to get war. The Soviet Union supported its Arab allies. In May 1967, the Soviets started a surge deployment of their naval forces into the East Mediterranean. Early in the crisis they began to shadow the US and British carriers with destroyers and intelligence collecting vessels. The Soviet naval squadron in the Mediterranean was sufficiently strong to act as a major restraint on the U.S. Navy. In a 1983 interview with The Boston Globe , McNamara claimed that We damn near had war. He said Kosygin was angry that we had turned around a carrier in the Mediterranean.McNamara US Near War in 67, The Boston Globe , Associated Pres, September 16, 1983. Surveillance of Martin Luther King Johnson continued the FBIs wiretapping of Martin Luther King Jr. that had been previously authorized by the Kennedy administration under Attorney General Robert Kennedy. As a result of listening to the FBIs tapes, remarks on Kings extramarital activities were made by several prominent officials, including Johnson, who once said that King was a hypocritical preacher. Johnson also authorized the tapping of phone conversations of others, including the Vietnamese friends of a Nixon associate. International trips Countries visited by Johnson during his presidency Johnson made eleven international trips to twenty countries during his presidency. He flew 523,000 miles aboard Air Force One while in office. His October 1966 visit to Australia sparked demonstrations from antiwar protesters. One of the most unusual international trips in presidential history occurred before Christmas in 1967. The President began the trip by going to the memorial service for Australian Prime Minister Harold Holt, who had disappeared in a swimming accident and was presumed drowned. The White House did not reveal in advance to the press that the President would make the first roundtheworld presidential trip. The trip was 26,959 miles completed in only 112.5 hours . Air Force One crossed the equator twice, stopped in Travis Air Force Base, Calif., then Honolulu, Pago Pago, Canberra, Melbourne, Vietnam, Karachi and Rome. 1968 presidential election President Johnson meets with Republican candidate Richard Nixon in the White House, July 1968 As he had served less than 24 months of President Kennedys term, Johnson was constitutionally permitted to run for a second full term in the 1968 presidential election under the provisions of the 22nd Amendment. Initially, no prominent Democratic candidate was prepared to run against a sitting president of the Democratic Party. Only Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota challenged Johnson as an antiwar candidate in the New Hampshire primary, hoping to pressure the Democrats to oppose the Vietnam War. On March 12, McCarthy won 42percent of the primary vote to Johnsons 49percent, an amazingly strong showing for such a challenger. Four days later, Sen. Robert F. Kennedy of New York entered the race. Internal polling by Johnsons campaign in Wisconsin, the next state to hold a primary election, showed the President trailing badly. Johnson did not leave the White House to campaign. By this time Johnson had lost control of the Democratic Party, which was splitting into four factions, each of which generally disliked the other three. The first consisted of Johnson , labor unions, and local party bosses . The second group consisted of students and intellectuals who were vociferously against the war and rallied behind McCarthy. The third group were Catholics, Hispanics and African Americans, who rallied behind Robert Kennedy. The fourth group were traditionally segregationist white Southerners, who rallied behind George C. Wallace and the American Independent Party. Vietnam was one of many issues that splintered the party, and Johnson could see no way to win the war and no way to unite the party long enough for him to win reelection.Gould 2010. In addition, although it was not made public at the time, Johnson became more worried about his failing health and was concerned that he might not live through another fouryear term. In 1967, he secretly commissioned an actuarial study that predicted he would die at 64. Therefore, at the end of a speech on March 31, 1968, he shocked the nation when he announced he would not run for reelection by concluding with the line I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your President. The next day, his approval ratings increased from 36 to 49. Historians have debated the factors that led to Johnsons surprise decision. Shesol says Johnson wanted out of the White House but also wanted vindication when the indicators turned negative he decided to leave. Gould says that Johnson had neglected the party, was hurting it by his Vietnam policies, and underestimated McCarthys strength until the very last minute, when it was too late for Johnson to recover.Gould 2010, pp. 16 18. Woods said Johnson realized he needed to leave in order for the nation to heal. Dallek says that Johnson had no further domestic goals, and realized that his personality had eroded his popularity. His health was not good, and he was preoccupied with the Kennedy campaign his wife was pressing for his retirement and his base of support continued to shrink. Leaving the race would allow him to pose as a peacemaker.Dallek 1998, pp. 518 525. Bennett, however, says Johnson had been forced out of a reelection race in 1968 by outrage over his policy in Southeast Asia. After Robert Kennedys assassination, Johnson rallied the party bosses and unions to give Humphrey the nomination at the 1968 Democratic National Convention. Personal correspondences between the President and some in the Republican Party suggested Johnson tacitly supported Nelson Rockefellers campaign. He reportedly said that if Rockefeller became the Republican nominee, he would not campaign against him . In what was termed the October surprise, Johnson announced to the nation on October 31, 1968, that he had ordered a complete cessation of all air, naval and artillery bombardment of North Vietnam, effective November 1, should the Hanoi Government be willing to negotiate and citing progress with the Paris peace talks. In the end, Democrats did not fully unite behind Humphrey, enabling Republican candidate Richard Nixon to win the election. Administration and Cabinet Official White House portrait Judicial appointments With the appointment of Thurgood Marshall, Johnson placed the first African American on the Supreme Court. Johnson appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States Abe Fortas1965 Thurgood Marshall1967 Johnson anticipated court challenges to his legislative measures in 1965, and thought it advantageous to have a mole in the Supreme Court who he thought could provide him with inside information, as he was able to get from the legislative branch. Abe Fortas in particular was the individual that Johnson thought could fill the bill. The opportunity arose when an opening occurred for Ambassador to the UN, with Adlai Stevensons death Associate Justice Arthur Goldberg accepted Johnsons offer to transfer to the UN position. Johnson insisted on Fortas assuming Goldbergs seat, over Fortass wifes objection that it was too early in his career. Mrs. Fortas expressed disapproval to Johnson personally afterwards.Dallek 1998, pp. 233 235. When Earl Warren announced his retirement in 1968, Johnson nominated Fortas to succeed him as Chief Justice of the United States, and nominated Homer Thornberry to succeed Fortas as Associate Justice. However, Fortass nomination was filibustered by senators, and neither nominee was voted upon by the full Senate. Postpresidency Coat of Arms of Lyndon B. Johnson Johnson with longer hair during an interview in August 1972, five months before his death After leaving the presidency in January 1969, Johnson went home to his ranch in Stonewall, Texas, accompanied by former aide and speechwriter Harry J. Middleton, who would draft Johnsons first book, The Choices We Face, and work with him on his memoirs entitled The Vantage Point Perspectives of the Presidency 1963 1969, published in 1971. That year, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum opened on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin. He donated his Texas ranch in his will to the public to form the Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park, with the provision that the ranch remain a working ranch and not become a sterile relic of the past. Johnson gave Nixon high grades in foreign policy, but worried that his successor was being pressured into removing U.S. forces too quickly from South Vietnam, before the South Vietnamese were really able to defend themselves. If the South falls to the Communists, we can have a serious backlash here at home, he warned. During the 1972 presidential election, Johnson endorsed Democratic presidential nominee George S. McGovern, a senator from South Dakota, although McGovern had long opposed Johnsons foreign and defense policies. The McGovern nomination and presidential platform dismayed him. Nixon could be defeated if only the Democrats dont go too far left, he had insisted. Johnson had felt Edmund Muskie would be more likely to defeat Nixon however, he declined an invitation to try to stop McGovern receiving the nomination as he felt his unpopularity within the Democratic party was such that anything he said was more likely to help McGovern. Johnsons protg John Connally had served as President Nixons Secretary of the Treasury and then stepped down to head Democrats for Nixon, a group funded by Republicans. It was the first time that Connally and Johnson were on opposite sides of a general election campaign. Wearing a ten gallon hat at his ranch in Texas, 1972 In March 1970, Johnson suffered an attack of angina and was taken to Brooke Army General Hospital on Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio. He was urged to lose a considerable amount of weight. Johnson had grown dangerously heavier since leaving the White House, gaining more than and weighing around . He had also resumed smoking after nearly 15 years without having done so, which contributed further to his health problems. The following summer, again gripped by chest pains, he embarked on a crash water diet, shedding about in less than a month. In April 1972, Johnson fell victim to a second heart attack while visiting his daughter, Lynda, in Charlottesville, Virginia. Im hurting real bad, he confided to friends. The chest pains hit him nearly every afternoon a series of sharp, jolting pains that left him scared and breathless. A portable oxygen tank stood next to his bed, and he periodically interrupted what he was doing to lie down and don the mask to gulp air. He continued to smoke heavily, and, although placed on a lowcalorie, lowcholesterol diet, kept to it only in fits and starts. Meanwhile, he began experiencing severe abdominal pains. Doctors diagnosed this problem through Xrays as diverticulosis pouches of tissue forming on the intestine. His condition rapidly worsened and surgery was recommended, so Johnson flew to Houston to consult with heart specialist Dr. Michael DeBakey. DeBakey discovered that even though two of the former Presidents coronary arteries were critically damaged, the overall condition of his heart was so poor that even attempting a bypass surgery would likely result in fatal complications. Death and funeral Johnsons heart condition was now diagnosed as terminal, and he returned home to his ranch. At approximately 339pm Central Time on January 22, 1973, Johnson placed a call to the ranchs Secret Service compound complaining of massive chest pains. The agents rushed to the former Presidents bedroom and found him unresponsive with the phone receiver still in his hand. Johnson was airlifted in one of his own airplanes to San Antonio and taken to Brooke Army General, where he was pronounced dead on arrival at the facility by cardiologist and Army colonel Dr. George McGranahan. He was 64 years old. The Age , January 23, 1973, p. 1. Shortly after Johnsons death, his press secretary Tom Johnson telephoned Walter Cronkite at CBS Cronkite was live on the air with the CBS Evening News at the time, and a report on Vietnam was cut abruptly while Cronkite was still on the line, so he could break the news. Johnsons death came two days after Richard Nixons second inauguration, which followed Nixons landslide victory in the 1972 election. His passing meant that for the first time since 1933, when Calvin Coolidge died during Herbert Hoovers final months in office, that there were no former Presidents still living Johnson had been the only living exPresident since December 26, 1972 following the death of Harry S. Truman. A memorial wreath at his grave in Texas Johnson was honored with a state funeral in which Texas Congressman J. J. Pickle and former Secretary of State Dean Rusk eulogized him at the Capitol. The final services took place on January 25. The funeral was held at the National City Christian Church in Washington, D.C., where he had often worshiped as president. The service was presided over by President Richard Nixon and attended by foreign dignitaries, led by former Japanese prime minister Eisaku SatM, who served as Japanese prime minister during Johnsons presidency. Eulogies were given by the Rev. Dr. George Davis, the churchs pastor, and W. Marvin Watson, former postmaster general. Nixon did not speak, though he attended, as is customary for presidents during state funerals, but the eulogists turned to him and lauded him for his tributes, as Rusk did the day before, as Nixon mentioned Johnsons death in a speech he gave the day after Johnson died, announcing the peace agreement to end the Vietnam War. Lying in state in the United States Capitol rotunda Johnson was buried in his family cemetery , a few yards from the house in which he was born. Eulogies were given by former Texas governor John Connally and the Rev. Billy Graham, the minister who officiated at the burial rites. The state funeral, the last for a president until Ronald Reagans in 2004, was part of an unexpectedly busy week in Washington, as the Military District of Washington dealt with its second major task in less than a week, beginning with Nixons second inauguration. The inauguration affected the state funeral in various ways, because Johnson died only two days after the inauguration. The MDW and the Armed Forces Inaugural Committee canceled the remainder of the ceremonies surrounding the inauguration, to allow for a full state funeral, and many of the military men who participated in the inauguration took part in the funeral. It also meant Johnsons casket traveled the entire length of the Capitol, entering through the Senate wing when taken into the rotunda to lie in state and exiting through the House wing steps due to inauguration construction on the East Front steps. Personality and public image Johnsons image as it appears in the National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C. According to biographer Radall Woods, Johnson posed in many different roles. Depending on the circumstances, he could be Other historians have noted how he played additional roles, as Kent Germany reports Johnson was often seen as a wildly ambitious, tireless, and imposing figure who was ruthlessly effective at getting legislation passed. He worked 18 to 20hour days without break and was apparently absent of any leisure activities. There was no more powerful majority leader in American history, biographer Robert Dallek writes. Dallek stated that Johnson had biographies on all the Senators, knew what their ambitions, hopes, and tastes were and used it to his advantage in securing votes. Another Johnson biographer noted, He could get up every day and learn what their fears, their desires, their wishes, their wants were and he could then manipulate, dominate, persuade and cajole them. At tall,Caro 1982, p. 146.Dallek 1998, p. 12. Johnson had his own particular brand of persuasion, known as The Johnson Treatment. A contemporary writes, It was an incredible blend of badgering, cajolery, reminders of past favors, promises of future favors, predictions of gloom if something doesnt happen. When that man started to work on you, all of a sudden, you just felt that you were standing under a waterfall and the stuff was pouring on you. Johnsons cowboy hat and boots reflected his Texas roots and genuine love of the rural hill country. From of land that he was given by an aunt in 1951, he created a working ranch with 400 head of registered Hereford cattle. The National Park Service keeps a herd of Hereford cattle descended from Johnsons registered herd and maintains the ranch property. Biographer Randall Woods argues that Social Gospel themes Johnson learned from childhood allowed him to transform social problems into moral problems. This helps explain his longtime commitment to social justice, as exemplified by the Great Society and his commitment to racial equality. The Social Gospel explicitly inspired his foreignpolicy approach to a sort of Christian internationalism and nation building. For example, in a 1966 speech he quoted at length from the Social Creed of the Methodist Church issued in 1940, adding It would be very hard for me to write a more perfect description of the American ideal.Randall B. Woods, LBJ Architect of American Ambition pp. 27, 430, 465 66, 486 87 Legacy History has viewed Johnson both through the lens of his historic legislative achievements, and his lack of success in the Vietnam War. His overall rating among historians has remained relatively steady over the past 35 years, and his average ranking is higher than any of the eight presidents that followed him, although similar to Reagan and Clinton. The Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston was renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in 1973, and Texas created a legal state holiday to be observed on August 27 to mark Johnsons birthday. It is known as Lyndon Baines Johnson Day. The Lyndon Baines Johnson Memorial Grove on the Potomac was dedicated on April 6, 1976. The Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs was named in his honor, as is the Lyndon B. Johnson National Grassland. Also named for him are Lyndon B. Johnson High School in Austin, Lyndon B. Johnson High School in Laredo, Lyndon B. Johnson Middle School in Melbourne, Florida, and Lyndon B. Johnson Elementary School in Jackson, Kentucky. Interstate 635 in Dallas, Texas is named the Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway. Johnson was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom posthumously in 1980. On March 23, 2007, President George W. Bush signed legislation naming the United States Department of Education headquarters after President Johnson. Major legislation signed 1963 Clean Air Act of 1963 1963 Higher Education Facilities Act of 1963 1963 Vocational Education Act of 1963 1964 Civil Rights Act of 1964 1964 Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964 1964 Wilderness Act 1964 Nurse Training Act of 1964 1964 Food Stamp Act of 1964 1964 Economic Opportunity Act 1964 Housing Act of 1964 1965 Higher Education Act of 1965 1965 Older Americans Act 1965 Coinage Act of 1965 1965 Social Security Act of 1965 1965 Voting Rights Act of 1965 1965 Immigration and Nationality Services Act of 1965 1966 Animal Welfare Act of 1966 1966 Freedom of Information Act 1967 Age Discrimination in Employment Act 1967 Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 1968 Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 1968 Bilingual Education Act 1968 Civil Rights Act of 1968 1968 Gun Control Act of 1968 Significant regulatory changes 1968 FCC creates national emergency number 911 Gallery FileA273819a small.jpgGreeting members of a crowd, 1966 FileLyndon B. Johnsons family Xmas Eve 1968.jpgWith his family in the Yellow Oval Room, Christmas 1968 FileLbj2.jpgSmiling in the Oval Office in 1969, a few days before Richard Nixons inauguration FileLyndon B Johnson Memorial.jpgEntrance to the Lyndon Baines Johnson Memorial Grove on the Potomac See also Electoral history of Lyndon B. Johnson History of the United States History of the United States Holocaust Museum Houston Johnson Doctrine List of presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum on the campus of the University of Texas in Austin Lyndon B. Johnson in popular culture Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps Zephyr Wright Footnotes References Works cited Further reading Berman, Larry. Lyndon Johnsons War The Road to Stalemate in Vietnam Cohen, Warren I., and Nancy Bernkopf Tuckerm, eds. Lyndon Johnson Confronts the World American Foreign Policy 1963 1968 . Colman, Jonathan. The Foreign Policy of Lyndon B. Johnson The United States and the World, 1963 1969 231 pp. , Abridged version of his twovolume biography Ellis, Sylvia . Freedoms Pragmatist Lyndon Johnson and Civil Rights. Gainesville, FL University Press of Florida. Gavin, Francis J. and Mark Atwood Lawrence, eds. Beyond the Cold War Lyndon Johnson and the New Global Challenges of the 1960s DOI10.1093acprofoso9780199790692.001.0001 online Lichtenstein, Nelson, ed. Political Profiles The Johnson Years . 1976. short biographies of 400 key politicians Vandiver, Frank E. Shadows of Vietnam Lyndon Johnsons Wars Woods, Randall B. Prisoners of Hope Lyndon B. Johnson, the Great Society, and the Limits of Liberalism , 480pp. Zarefsky, David. President Johnsons War on Poverty . Historiography Catsam, Derek. The Civil Rights Movement and the Presidency in the Hot Years of the Cold War A Historical and Historiographical Assessment. History Compass 61 314 344. Germany, Kent B. Historians and the Many Lyndon Johnsons A Review Essay Journal of Southern History 754 pp.1001 1028. in JSTOR Lerner, Mitchell B. A Companion to Lyndon B. Johnson , Scholarly essays on all aspects of Johnsons career External links Presidential Library Museum White House biography The Presidential Recordings of Lyndon B. Johnson Digital Edition Life Portrait of Lyndon B. Johnson, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , November 12, 1999 Lyndon Baines Johnson A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Extensive essays on Lyndon Johnson and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs LBJ , an American Experience documentary Lyndon B. Johnson Personal Manuscripts Category1908 births Category1973 deaths Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury Disciples of Christ CategoryAmerican anticommunists CategoryAmerican gun control advocates CategoryAmerican memoirists CategoryAmerican military personnel of World War II CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of German descent CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryAmerican people of the Vietnam War CategoryAmerican schoolteachers CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryBurials in Texas CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryDemocratic Party vice presidential nominees CategoryDemocratic Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party United States Senators CategoryDemocratic Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryKennedy administration cabinet members Lyndon CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Texas CategoryMilitary personnel from Texas CategoryPeople associated with the assassination of John F. Kennedy CategoryPeople from Austin, Texas CategoryPeople from Fredericksburg, Texas CategoryPeople from Gillespie County, Texas CategoryPeople from the Texas Hill Country CategoryPresidential Medal of Freedom recipients CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRanchers from Texas CategoryRecipients of the Silver Star CategorySan Marcos, Texas CategorySons of the American Revolution CategorySpace advocates CategoryTexas Democrats CategoryTexas State University alumni CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1956 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1960 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1964 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1968 CategoryUnited States Senators from Texas CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1960 CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryWriters from Austin,Texas
Barack Hussein Obama II is an American politician who served as the 44th President of the United States from 2009 to 2017. He is the first African American to have served as president. He previously served in the U.S. Senate representing Illinois from 2005 to 2008 and in the Illinois State Senate from 1997 to 2004. Obama was born in 1961 in Honolulu, Hawaii, two years after the territory was admitted to the Union as the 50th state. Raised largely in Hawaii, Obama also spent one year of his childhood in Washington State and four years in Indonesia. After graduating from Columbia University in 1983, he worked as a community organizer in Chicago. In 1988 Obama enrolled in Harvard Law School, where he was the first black president of the Harvard Law Review . After graduation, he became a civil rights attorney and professor, and taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School from 1992 to 2004. Obama represented the 13th District for three terms in the Illinois Senate from 1997 to 2004, when he ran for the U.S. Senate. Obama received national attention in 2004, with his unexpected March primary win, his wellreceived July Democratic National Convention keynote address, and his landslide November election to the Senate. In 2008, Obama was nominated for president, a year after his campaign began, and after a close primary campaign against Hillary Clinton. He was elected over Republican John McCain, and was inaugurated on January 20, 2009. Nine months later, Obama was named the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize laureate. During his first two years in office, Obama signed many landmark bills. Main reforms were the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , the Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, and the Dont Ask, Dont Tell Repeal Act of 2010. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 served as economic stimulus amidst the Great Recession, but the GOP regained control of the House of Representatives in 2011. After a lengthy debate over the national debt limit, Obama signed the Budget Control and the American Taxpayer Relief Acts. In foreign policy, Obama increased U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan, reduced nuclear weapons with the United States Russia New START treaty, and ended military involvement in the Iraq War. He ordered military involvement in Libya in opposition to Muammar Gaddafi, and the military operation that resulted in the death of Osama bin Laden. After winning reelection by defeating Republican opponent Mitt Romney, Obama was sworn in for a second term in 2013. During his second term, Obama promoted inclusiveness for LGBT Americans, with his administration filing briefs that urged the Supreme Court to strike down samesex marriage bans as unconstitutional . Obama advocated for gun control in response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, and issued wideranging executive actions concerning climate change and immigration. In foreign policy, Obama ordered military intervention in Iraq in response to gains made by ISIL after the 2011 withdrawal from Iraq, continued the process of ending U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan, promoted discussions that led to the 2015 Paris Agreement on global climate change, initiated sanctions against Russia following the invasion in Ukraine and again after Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections, brokered a nuclear deal with Iran, and normalized U.S. relations with Cuba. Obama left office in January 2017 with a 60 approval rating. He currently resides in Washington, D.C. His presidential library will be built in Chicago. Early life and career Obama was born on August 4, 1961, at Kapiolani Maternity Gynecological Hospital in Honolulu, Hawaii. He is the first President to have been born in Hawaii, making him the first President born outside of the contiguous 48 states. He was born to a white mother and a black father. His mother, Ann Dunham , was born in Wichita, Kansas, of mostly English descent,Obama , p. 12. with some German, Irish, Scottish, Swiss, and Welsh ancestry. His father, Barack Obama Sr. , was a married Luo Kenyan man from Nyangoma Kogelo. Obamas parents met in 1960 in a Russian language class at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, where his father was a foreign student on scholarship.Obama , pp. 9 10. Scott , pp. 80 86. Jacobs , pp. 115 118. Maraniss , pp. 154 160. The couple married in Wailuku, Hawaii on February 2, 1961, six months before Obama was born.Scott , p. 86. Jacobs , pp. 125 127. Maraniss , pp. 160 163. In late August 1961, Obamas mother moved with him to the University of Washington in Seattle for a year. During that time, Obama Sr. completed his undergraduate degree in economics in Hawaii in June 1962, then left to attend graduate school on a scholarship at Harvard University, where he earned an M.A. in economics. Obamas parents divorced in March 1964.Scott , pp. 87 93. Jacobs , pp. 115 118, 125 127, 133 161. Maraniss , pp. 170 183, 188 189. Obama Sr. returned to Kenya in 1964, where he married for a third time. He visited his son in Hawaii only once, at Christmas time in 1971,Scott , pp. 142 144. Jacobs , pp. 161 177, 227 230. Maraniss , pp. 190 194, 201 209, 227 230. before he was killed in an automobile accident in 1982, when Obama was 21 years old. Jacobs , pp. 251 255. Maraniss , pp. 411 417. Of his early childhood, Obama recalled, That my father looked nothing like the people around me that he was black as pitch, my mother white as milk barely registered in my mind. He described his struggles as a young adult to reconcile social perceptions of his multiracial heritage. Obama , Chapters 4 and 5. In 1963, Dunham met Lolo Soetoro, an Indonesian East West Center graduate student in geography at the University of Hawaii, and the couple were married on Molokai on March 15, 1965.Scott , pp. 97 103. Maraniss , pp. 195 201, 225 230. After two oneyear extensions of his J1 visa, Lolo returned to Indonesia in 1966, followed sixteen months later by his wife and stepson in 1967, with the family initially living in a Menteng Dalam neighborhood in the Tebet subdistrict of south Jakarta, then from 1970 in a wealthier neighborhood in the Menteng subdistrict of central Jakarta.Maraniss , pp. 195 201, 209 223, 230 244. Education From age six to ten, Obama attended local Indonesianlanguage schools Sekolah Katolik Santo Fransiskus Asisi for two years and Sekolah Dasar Negeri Menteng 01 for one and a half years, supplemented by Englishlanguage Calvert School homeschooling by his mother.Maraniss , pp. 216, 221, 230, 234 244. During his time in Indonesia, Obamas stepfather taught him to be resilient and gave him a pretty hardheaded assessment of how the world works. Obama returned to Honolulu in 1971 to live with his maternal grandparents, Madelyn and Stanley Dunham. He attended Punahou School a private college preparatory school with the aid of a scholarship from fifth grade until his graduation from high school in 1979. Obama , Chapters 3 and 4. Scott , pp. 131 134. Maraniss , pp. 264 269. In his youth, Obama went by the nickname Barry. Obama lived with his mother and halfsister, Maya Soetoro, in Hawaii for three years from 1972 to 1975 while his mother was a graduate student in anthropology at the University of Hawaii.Scott , pp. 139 157. Maraniss , pp. 279 281. Obama chose to stay in Hawaii with his grandparents for high school at Punahou when his mother and halfsister returned to Indonesia in 1975 so his mother could begin anthropology field work.Scott , pp. 157 194. Maraniss , pp. 279 281, 324 326. His mother spent most of the next two decades in Indonesia, divorcing Lolo in 1980 and earning a PhD degree in 1992, before dying in 1995 in Hawaii following unsuccessful treatment for ovarian cancer and uterine cancer.Scott , pp. 214, 294, 317 346. Reflecting later on his years in Honolulu, Obama wrote The opportunity that Hawaii offered to experience a variety of cultures in a climate of mutual respect became an integral part of my world view, and a basis for the values that I hold most dear. Obama has also written and talked about using alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine during his teenage years to push questions of who I was out of my mind. Obama was also a member of the choom gang, a selfnamed group of friends that spent time together and occasionally smoked marijuana. for analysis of the political impact of the quote and Obamas more recent admission that he smoked marijuana as a teenager , see After graduating from high school in 1979, Obama moved to Los Angeles to attend Occidental College. In February 1981, Obama made his first public speech, calling for Occidental to participate in the disinvestment from South Africa in response to that nations policy of apartheid. In mid1981, Obama traveled to Indonesia to visit his mother and halfsister Maya, and visited the families of college friends in Pakistan and India for three weeks. Later in 1981, he transferred as a junior to Columbia University in New York City, where he majored in political science with a specialty in international relations and in English literature and lived offcampus on West 109th Street. He graduated with a BA degree in 1983 and worked for about a year at the Business International Corporation, where he was a financial researcher and writer, then as a project coordinator for the New York Public Interest Research Group on the City College of New York campus for three months in 1985. Obama , pp. 133 140. Mendell , pp. 62 63. Family and personal life Obama posing in the Green Room of the White House with wife Michelle and daughters Sasha and Malia in 2009 In a 2006 interview, Obama highlighted the diversity of his extended family Its like a little miniUnited Nations, he said. Ive got relatives who look like Bernie Mac, and Ive got relatives who look like Margaret Thatcher. Obama has a halfsister with whom he was raised and seven halfsiblings from his Kenyan fathers family six of them living. See also Obamas mother was survived by her Kansasborn mother, Madelyn Dunham, until her death on November 2, 2008, two days before his election to the Presidency. Obama also has roots in Ireland he met with his Irish cousins in Moneygall in May 2011. In Dreams from My Father , Obama ties his mothers family history to possible Native American ancestors and distant relatives of Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War.Obama , p. 13. For reports on Obamas maternal genealogy, including slave owners, Irish connections, and common ancestors with George W. Bush, Dick Cheney, and Harry S. Truman, see Obama with Jonathan Toews and the Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks in 2010 Besides his native English, Obama speaks some basic Indonesian, having learned the language during his four childhood years in Jakarta. He plays basketball, a sport he participated in as a member of his high schools varsity team See also he is lefthanded. Obama taking a lefthanded jump shot during a pickup game on the White House basketball court, 2009 Obama is a supporter of the Chicago White Sox, and he threw out the first pitch at the 2005 ALCS when he was still a senator. In 2009, he threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the AllStar Game while wearing a White Sox jacket. He is also primarily a Chicago Bears football fan in the NFL, but in his childhood and adolescence was a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers, and rooted for them ahead of their victory in Super Bowl XLIII 12 days after he took office as President. In 2011, Obama invited the 1985 Chicago Bears to the White House the team had not visited the White House after their Super Bowl win in 1986 due to the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster. Obama and his wife Michelle at the Civil Rights Summit at the LBJ Presidential Library in 2014 Obama lived with anthropologist Sheila Miyoshi Jager while he was a community organizer in Chicago in the 1980s. He proposed to her twice, but both Jager and her parents turned him down. The relationship was only made public in May 2017, several months after Obamas twoterm presidency had ended. In June 1989, Obama met Michelle Robinson when he was employed as a summer associate at the Chicago law firm of Sidley Austin.Obama , pp. 327 332. See also Assigned for three months as Obamas adviser at the firm, Robinson joined him at several group social functions, but declined his initial requests to date.Obama , p. 329. They began dating later that summer, became engaged in 1991, and were married on October 3, 1992. The couples first daughter, Malia Ann, was born on July 4, 1998, followed by a second daughter, Natasha , on June 10, 2001.Obama , p. 440, and Obama , pp. 339 340. See also The Obama daughters attended the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools. When they moved to Washington, D.C., in January 2009, the girls started at the Sidwell Friends School. The Obamas have two Portuguese Water Dogs the first, a male named Bo, was a gift from Senator Ted Kennedy. In August 2013, Bo was joined by Sunny, a female. Applying the proceeds of a book deal, the family moved in 2005 from a Hyde Park, Chicago condominium to a 1.6million house in neighboring Kenwood, Chicago. The purchase of an adjacent lot and sale of part of it to Obama by the wife of developer, campaign donor and friend Tony Rezko attracted media attention because of Rezkos subsequent indictment and conviction on political corruption charges that were unrelated to Obama. In December 2007, Money estimated the Obama familys net worth at 1.3million.See also Their 2009 tax return showed a household income of 5.5million up from about 4.2million in 2007 and 1.6million in 2005 mostly from sales of his books. On his 2010 income of 1.7million, he gave 14 to nonprofit organizations, including 131,000 to Fisher House Foundation, a charity assisting wounded veterans families, allowing them to reside near where the veteran is receiving medical treatments. As per his 2012 financial disclosure, Obama may be worth as much as 10million. In reference to Obamas smoking habit, Michelle said in early 2010 that he had quit smoking.Elsner, Alan . Obama says he wont be smoking in White House. Reuters. Retrieved February 28, 2010.Zengerle, Patricia . Yes, he did first lady says Obama quit smoking. Reuters. Retrieved May 9, 2011. On his 55th birthday, August 4, 2016, Obama penned an essay in Glamour describing how his daughters and being president have made him a feminist. Religious views The Obamas worship at African Methodist Episcopal Church in Washington, D.C., January 2013 Obama is a Protestant Christian whose religious views developed in his adult life. He wrote in The Audacity of Hope that he was not raised in a religious household. He described his mother, raised by nonreligious parents, as being detached from religion, yet in many ways the most spiritually awakened person that I have ever known. He described his father as a confirmed atheist by the time his parents met, and his stepfather as a man who saw religion as not particularly useful. Obama explained how, through working with black churches as a community organizer while in his twenties, he came to understand the power of the AfricanAmerican religious tradition to spur social change. In January 2008, Obama told Christianity Today I am a Christian, and I am a devout Christian. I believe in the redemptive death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. I believe that faith gives me a path to be cleansed of sin and have eternal life. On September 27, 2010, Obama released a statement commenting on his religious views saying Im a Christian by choice. My family didnt frankly, they werent folks who went to church every week. And my mother was one of the most spiritual people I knew, but she didnt raise me in the church. So I came to my Christian faith later in life, and it was because the precepts of Jesus Christ spoke to me in terms of the kind of life that I would want to lead being my brothers and sisters keeper, treating others as they would treat me. Obama met Trinity United Church of Christ pastor Rev. Jeremiah Wright in October 1987, and became a member of Trinity in 1992. He resigned from Trinity in May 2008 during his first presidential campaign after some of Wrights statements were criticized. The Obama family has attended several Protestant churches since moving to Washington, D.C., in 2009, including Shiloh Baptist Church and St. Johns Episcopal Church, as well as Evergreen Chapel at Camp David, but are not habitual churchgoers.Parker, Ashley. As the Obamas Celebrate Christmas, Rituals of Faith Become Less Visible, The New York Times , December 28, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2017.Gilgoff, Dan. TIME Report, White House Reaction Raise More Questions About Obamas Church Hunt, U.S. News World Report , June 30, 2009. Retrieved January 15, 2017.First Lady We Use Sundays For Naps If Were Not Going To Church, CBS DC, April 22, 2014. Retrieved January 15, 2017. Law career Community organizer and Harvard Law School Two years after graduating from Columbia, Obama was hired in Chicago as director of the Developing Communities Project, a churchbased community organization originally comprising eight Catholic parishes in Roseland, West Pullman, and Riverdale on Chicagos South Side. He worked there as a community organizer from June 1985 to May 1988. Obama , pp. 140 295. Mendell , pp. 63 83. He helped set up a job training program, a college preparatory tutoring program, and a tenants rights organization in Altgeld Gardens. Obama also worked as a consultant and instructor for the Gamaliel Foundation, a community organizing institute. reprinted in In mid1988, he traveled for the first time in Europe for three weeks and then for five weeks in Kenya, where he met many of his paternal relatives for the first time.Obama , pp. 299 437. Maraniss , pp. 564 570. Obama entered Harvard Law School in the fall of 1988, living in nearby Somerville, Massachusetts. Barack Obama lived in the big, ivycovered brick building at 365 Broadway... From 1988 to 1991, the future president resided in a basement apartment while attending Harvard Law School. He was selected as an editor of the Harvard Law Review at the end of his first year, Mendell , pp. 80 92. president of the journal in his second year, and research assistant to the constitutional scholar Laurence Tribe while at Harvard for two years. During his summers, he returned to Chicago, where he worked as an associate at the law firms of Sidley Austin in 1989 and Hopkins Sutter in 1990. After graduating with a JD degree magna cum laude from Harvard in 1991, he returned to Chicago. Obamas election as the first black president of the Harvard Law Review gained national media attention and led to a publishing contract and advance for a book about race relations, Obama , pp. xiii xvii. which evolved into a personal memoir. The manuscript was published in mid1995 as Dreams from My Father . Chicago Law School and civil rights attorney In 1991, Obama accepted a twoyear position as Visiting Law and Government Fellow at the University of Chicago Law School to work on his first book. He then taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School for twelve years, first as a Lecturer from 1992 to 1996, and then as a Senior Lecturer from 1996 to 2004. From April to October 1992, Obama directed Illinoiss Project Vote, a voter registration campaign with ten staffers and seven hundred volunteer registrars it achieved its goal of registering 150,000 of 400,000 unregistered African Americans in the state, leading Crains Chicago Business to name Obama to its 1993 list of 40 under Forty powers to be. He joined Davis, Miner, Barnhill Galland, a 13attorney law firm specializing in civil rights litigation and neighborhood economic development, where he was an associate for three years from 1993 to 1996, then of counsel from 1996 to 2004. In 1994, he was listed as one of the lawyers in BuycksRoberson v. Citibank Fed. Sav. Bank , 94 C 4094 . This class action lawsuit was filed in 1994 with Selma BuycksRoberson as lead plaintiff and alleged that Citibank Federal Savings Bank had engaged in practices forbidden under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act. The case was settled out of court. Final Judgment was issued on May 13, 1998, with Citibank Federal Savings Bank agreeing to pay attorney fees. His law license became inactive in 2007. From 1994 to 2002, Obama served on the boards of directors of the Woods Fund of Chicago, which in 1985 had been the first foundation to fund the Developing Communities Project, and of the Joyce Foundation. He served on the board of directors of the Chicago Annenberg Challenge from 1995 to 2002, as founding president and chairman of the board of directors from 1995 to 1999. Legislative career Illinois State Senator State Senator Obama and others celebrate the naming of a street in Chicago after ShoreBank cofounder Milton Davis in 1998 Obama was elected to the Illinois Senate in 1996, succeeding Democratic State Senator Alice Palmer from Illinoiss 13th District, which, at that time, spanned Chicago South Side neighborhoods from Hyde Park Kenwood south to South Shore and west to Chicago Lawn. State Sen. District 13 State Rep. Districts 25 26. Once elected, Obama gained bipartisan support for legislation that reformed ethics and health care laws. See also He sponsored a law that increased tax credits for lowincome workers, negotiated welfare reform, and promoted increased subsidies for childcare. In 2001, as cochairman of the bipartisan Joint Committee on Administrative Rules, Obama supported Republican Governor Ryans payday loan regulations and predatory mortgage lending regulations aimed at averting home foreclosures. He was reelected to the Illinois Senate in 1998, defeating Republican Yesse Yehudah in the general election, and was reelected again in 2002. In 2000, he lost a Democratic primary race for Illinoiss 1st congressional district in the United States House of Representatives to fourterm incumbent Bobby Rush by a margin of two to one. In January 2003, Obama became chairman of the Illinois Senates Health and Human Services Committee when Democrats, after a decade in the minority, regained a majority. He sponsored and led unanimous, bipartisan passage of legislation to monitor racial profiling by requiring police to record the race of drivers they detained, and legislation making Illinois the first state to mandate videotaping of homicide interrogations. During his 2004 general election campaign for the U.S. Senate, police representatives credited Obama for his active engagement with police organizations in enacting death penalty reforms. See also Obama resigned from the Illinois Senate in November 2004 following his election to the U.S. Senate. 2004 U.S. Senate campaign County results of the 2004 U.S. Senate race in Illinois. Obama won the counties in blue. In May 2002, Obama commissioned a poll to assess his prospects in a 2004 U.S. Senate race. He created a campaign committee, began raising funds, and lined up political media consultant David Axelrod by August 2002. Obama formally announced his candidacy in January 2003. Obama was an early opponent of the George W. Bush administrations 2003 invasion of Iraq. On October 2, 2002, the day President Bush and Congress agreed on the joint resolution authorizing the Iraq War, Obama addressed the first highprofile Chicago antiIraq War rally, and spoke out against the war. He addressed another antiwar rally in March 2003 and told the crowd that its not too late to stop the war. Decisions by Republican incumbent Peter Fitzgerald and his Democratic predecessor Carol Moseley Braun to not participate in the election resulted in wideopen Democratic and Republican primary contests involving fifteen candidates. In the March 2004 primary election, Obama won in an unexpected landslide which overnight made him a rising star within the national Democratic Party, started speculation about a presidential future, and led to the reissue of his memoir, Dreams from My Father . In July 2004, Obama delivered the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention, seen by 9.1million viewers. His speech was well received and elevated his status within the Democratic Party. Obamas expected opponent in the general election, Republican primary winner Jack Ryan, withdrew from the race in June 2004. Mendell , pp. 260 271. Six weeks later, Alan Keyes accepted the Republican nomination to replace Ryan. In the November 2004 general election, Obama won with 70 of the vote. U.S. Senator from Illinois The official portrait of Obama as a member of the United States Senate Obama was sworn in as a senator on January 3, 2005, becoming the only Senate member of the Congressional Black Caucus. CQ Weekly characterized him as a loyal Democrat based on analysis of all Senate votes from 2005 to 2007. Obama announced on November 13, 2008, that he would resign his Senate seat on November 16, 2008, before the start of the lameduck session, to focus on his transition period for the presidency. Legislation Obama cosponsored the Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act. He introduced two initiatives that bore his name Lugar Obama, which expanded the Nunn Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction concept to conventional weapons See also and the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006, which authorized the establishment of USAspending.gov, a web search engine on federal spending. See also On June 3, 2008, Senator Obama along with Senators Tom Carper, Tom Coburn, and John McCain introduced followup legislation Strengthening Transparency and Accountability in Federal Spending Act of 2008. Obama sponsored legislation that would have required nuclear plant owners to notify state and local authorities of radioactive leaks, but the bill failed to pass in the full Senate after being heavily modified in committee. Regarding tort reform, Obama voted for the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 and the FISA Amendments Act of 2008, which grants immunity from civil liability to telecommunications companies complicit with NSA warrantless wiretapping operations. Obama and U.S. Senator Richard Lugar visit a Russian facility for dismantling mobile missiles In December 2006, President Bush signed into law the Democratic Republic of the Congo Relief, Security, and Democracy Promotion Act, marking the first federal legislation to be enacted with Obama as its primary sponsor. In January 2007, Obama and Senator Feingold introduced a corporate jet provision to the Honest Leadership and Open Government Act, which was signed into law in September 2007. See also Obama also introduced two unsuccessful bills the Deceptive Practices and Voter Intimidation Prevention Act to criminalize deceptive practices in federal elections, See also and the Iraq War DeEscalation Act of 2007. Later in 2007, Obama sponsored an amendment to the Defense Authorization Act to add safeguards for personalitydisorder military discharges. This amendment passed the full Senate in the spring of 2008. He sponsored the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act supporting divestment of state pension funds from Irans oil and gas industry, which has not passed committee and cosponsored legislation to reduce risks of nuclear terrorism. Obama also sponsored a Senate amendment to the State Childrens Health Insurance Program, providing one year of job protection for family members caring for soldiers with combatrelated injuries. Committees Obama speaking with a soldier stationed in Iraq, 2006 Obama held assignments on the Senate Committees for Foreign Relations, Environment and Public Works and Veterans Affairs through December 2006. In January 2007, he left the Environment and Public Works committee and took additional assignments with Health, Education, Labor and Pensions and Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. He also became Chairman of the Senates subcommittee on European Affairs. As a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Obama made official trips to Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Central Asia and Africa. He met with Mahmoud Abbas before Abbas became President of the Palestinian National Authority, and gave a speech at the University of Nairobi in which he condemned corruption within the Kenyan government. Presidential campaigns 2008 presidential campaign Obama standing on stage with his wife and daughters just before announcing his presidential candidacy in Springfield, Illinois, February 10, 2007 On February 10, 2007, Obama announced his candidacy for President of the United States in front of the Old State Capitol building in Springfield, Illinois. The choice of the announcement site was viewed as symbolic because it was also where Abraham Lincoln delivered his historic House Divided speech in 1858. Obama emphasized issues of rapidly ending the Iraq War, increasing energy independence, and reforming the health care system, See also in a campaign that projected themes of hope and change. Numerous candidates entered the Democratic Party presidential primaries. The field narrowed to a duel between Obama and Senator Hillary Clinton after early contests, with the race remaining close throughout the primary process but with Obama gaining a steady lead in pledged delegates due to better longrange planning, superior fundraising, dominant organizing in caucus states, and better exploitation of delegate allocation rules. On June 7, 2008, Clinton ended her campaign and endorsed Obama. President George W. Bush meets with Presidentelect Obama in the Oval Office on November 10, 2008 On August 23, Obama announced his selection of Delaware Senator Joe Biden as his vice presidential running mate. Obama selected Biden from a field speculated to include former Indiana Governor and Senator Evan Bayh and Virginia Governor Tim Kaine. At the Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado, Hillary Clinton called for her supporters to endorse Obama, and she and Bill Clinton gave convention speeches in his support. Obama delivered his acceptance speech, not at the center where the Democratic National Convention was held, but at Invesco Field at Mile High to a crowd of approximately 84,000 people the speech was viewed by over 38million people worldwide. During both the primary process and the general election, Obamas campaign set numerous fundraising records, particularly in the quantity of small donations. On June 19, 2008, Obama became the first majorparty presidential candidate to turn down public financing in the general election since the system was created in 1976. 2008 electoral vote results John McCain was nominated as the Republican candidate, and he selected Sarah Palin as his running mate. The two candidates engaged in three presidential debates in September and October 2008. On November 4, Obama won the presidency with 365 electoral votes to 173 received by McCain. Obama won 52.9 of the popular vote to McCains 45.7. He became the first African American to be elected president. Obama delivered his victory speech before hundreds of thousands of supporters in Chicagos Grant Park. 2012 presidential campaign Obama greets former Governor Mitt Romney in the Oval Office on November 29, 2012, in their first meeting since Obamas reelection victory over Romney 2012 electoral vote results On April 4, 2011, Obama announced his reelection campaign for 2012 in a video titled It Begins with Us that he posted on his website and filed election papers with the Federal Election Commission. As the incumbent president he ran virtually unopposed in the Democratic Party presidential primaries, and on April 3, 2012, Obama had secured the 2778 convention delegates needed to win the Democratic nomination. At the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina, Obama and Joe Biden were formally nominated by former President Bill Clinton as the Democratic Party candidates for president and vice president in the general election. Their main opponents were Republicans Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, and Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin. On November 6, 2012, Obama won 332 electoral votes, exceeding the 270 required for him to be reelected as president. With 51.1 of the popular vote, Obama became the first Democratic president since Franklin D. Roosevelt to win the majority of the popular vote twice. President Obama addressed supporters and volunteers at Chicagos McCormick Place after his reelection and said Tonight you voted for action, not politics as usual. You elected us to focus on your jobs, not ours. And in the coming weeks and months, I am looking forward to reaching out and working with leaders of both parties. Presidency First 100 days altPhotograph The inauguration of Barack Obama as the 44th President took place on January 20, 2009. In his first few days in office, Obama issued executive orders and presidential memoranda directing the U.S. military to develop plans to withdraw troops from Iraq. He ordered the closing of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, but Congress prevented the closure by refusing to appropriate the required funds and preventing moving any Guantanamo detainee into the U.S. or to other countries. Obama reduced the secrecy given to presidential records. He also revoked President George W. Bushs restoration of President Ronald Reagans Mexico City Policy prohibiting federal aid to international family planning organizations that perform or provide counseling about abortion. Domestic policy The first bill signed into law by Obama was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009, relaxing the statute of limitations for equalpay lawsuits. Five days later, he signed the reauthorization of the State Childrens Health Insurance Program to cover an additional 4million uninsured children. In March 2009, Obama reversed a Bushera policy that had limited funding of embryonic stem cell research and pledged to develop strict guidelines on the research. Obama delivering a speech at joint session of Congress with Vice President Joe Biden and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on February 24, 2009 Obama appointed two women to serve on the Supreme Court in the first two years of his Presidency. He nominated Sonia Sotomayor on May 26, 2009 to replace retiring Associate Justice David Souter she was confirmed on August 6, 2009, becoming the first Supreme Court Justice of Hispanic descent. Obama nominated Elena Kagan on May 10, 2010 to replace retiring Associate Justice John Paul Stevens. She was confirmed on August 5, 2010, bringing the number of women sitting simultaneously on the Court to three justices for the first time in American history. On March 30, 2010, Obama signed the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act, a reconciliation bill that ended the process of the federal government giving subsidies to private banks to give out federally insured loans, increased the Pell Grant scholarship award, and made changes to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Obama meets with the Cabinet of the United States, November 23, 2009 In a major space policy speech in April 2010, Obama announced a planned change in direction at NASA, the U.S. space agency. He ended plans for a return of human spaceflight to the moon and development of the Ares I rocket, Ares V rocket and Constellation program, in favor of funding Earth science projects, a new rocket type, and research and development for an eventual manned mission to Mars, and ongoing missions to the International Space Station. President Obamas 2011 State of the Union Address focused on themes of education and innovation, stressing the importance of innovation economics to make the United States more competitive globally. He spoke of a fiveyear freeze in domestic spending, eliminating tax breaks for oil companies and reversing tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans, banning congressional earmarks, and reducing healthcare costs. He promised that the United States would have one million electric vehicles on the road by 2015 and would be 80 reliant on clean electricity. LGBT rights On October 8, 2009, Obama signed the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act, a measure that expanded the 1969 United States federal hatecrime law to include crimes motivated by a victims actual or perceived gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability. On October 30, 2009, Obama lifted the ban on travel to the United States by those infected with HIV, which was celebrated by Immigration Equality.Obama Lifts a Ban on Entry Into U.S. by H.I.V.Positive People, Julia Preston. The New York Times . October 30, 2009. Retrieved February 8, 2017 On December 22, 2010, Obama signed the Dont Ask, Dont Tell Repeal Act of 2010, which fulfilled a key promise made in the 2008 presidential campaign to end the Dont ask, dont tell policy of 1993 that had prevented gay and lesbian people from serving openly in the United States Armed Forces. In 2016, the Pentagon ended the policy that also barred transgender people from serving openly in the military. As a candidate for the Illinois state senate in 1996, Obama had said that he favored legalizing samesex marriage. By the time of his Senate run in 2004, he said that he supported civil unions and domestic partnerships for samesex partners, but he opposed samesex marriages for strategic reasons. On May 9, 2012, shortly after the official launch of his campaign for reelection as president, Obama said his views had evolved, and he publicly affirmed his personal support for the legalization of samesex marriage, becoming the first sitting U.S. president to do so. During his second inaugural address on January 21, 2013, Obama became the first president to call for full equality for gay Americans Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law for if we are truly created equal, then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well. This was the first time that a president mentioned gay rights or the word gay in an inaugural address. The White House was illuminated in rainbow colors on the evening of the Supreme Court samesex marriage ruling, June 26, 2015. In 2013, the Obama administration filed briefs that urged the Supreme Court to rule in favor of samesex couples in the cases of Hollingsworth v. Perry and United States v. Windsor . Then, following the Supreme Courts 2015 decision in Obergefell v. Hodges , Obama asserted that, This decision affirms what millions of Americans already believe in their hearts When all Americans are treated as equal we are all more free. On July 30, 2015 the White House Office of National AIDS Policy revised its strategy for addressing the ailment, which included widespread testing and linkage to healthcare, which was celebrated by the Human Rights Campaign.Obama Administration Releases Revised National HIV and AIDS Strategy, Human Rights Campaign. July 30, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2017 White House advisory and oversight groups On March 11, 2009, Obama created the White House Council on Women and Girls, which forms part of the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs, having been established by with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to the welfare of American women and girls. Executive Order 13506 , Washington, DC President Barack Obama, The White House, March 11, 2009, Obama, B.. Retrieved January 27, 2014. The Council is currently chaired by Senior Advisor to the President Valerie Jarrett. Obama also established the White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault through an official United States government memorandum on January 22, 2014, with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to sexual assault on college and university campuses throughout the United States. The current cochairs of the Task Force are Vice President Joe Biden and Jarrett. The Task Force has been a development out of the White House Council on Women and Girls and Office of the Vice President of the United States, and prior to that, the 1994 Violence Against Women Act that was first drafted by Biden.Rape and sexual assault A renewed call to action, White House Council on Women and Girls , Washington, D.C. White House Council on Women and Girls Office of the Vice President, January 2014. Retrieved June 10, 2014. Economic policy altPhotograph On February 17, 2009, Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, a 787billion economic stimulus package aimed at helping the economy recover from the deepening worldwide recession. The act includes increased federal spending for health care, infrastructure, education, various tax breaks and incentives, and direct assistance to individuals. Deficit and debt increases, 2001 16 In March, Obamas Treasury Secretary, Timothy Geithner, took further steps to manage the financial crisis, including introducing the Public Private Investment Program for Legacy Assets, which contains provisions for buying up to twotrillion dollars in depreciated real estate assets. Obama intervened in the troubled automotive industry in March 2009, renewing loans for General Motors and Chrysler to continue operations while reorganizing. Over the following months the White House set terms for both firms bankruptcies, including the sale of Chrysler to Italian automaker Fiat and a reorganization of GM giving the U.S. government a temporary 60 equity stake in the company, with the Canadian government taking a 12 stake. In June 2009, dissatisfied with the pace of economic stimulus, Obama called on his cabinet to accelerate the investment. He signed into law the Car Allowance Rebate System, known colloquially as Cash for Clunkers, that temporarily boosted the economy. Spending and loan guarantees from the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department authorized by the Bush and Obama administrations totaled about 11.5trillion, but only 3trillion was spent by the end of November 2009. Obama and the Congressional Budget Office predicted the 2010 budget deficit would be 1.5trillion or 10.6 of the nations gross domestic product compared to the 2009 deficit of 1.4trillion or 9.9 of GDP. For 2011, the administration predicted the deficit will shrink to 1.34trillion, and the 10year deficit will increase to 8.53trillion or 90 of GDP. The most recent increase in the U.S. debt ceiling to 17.2trillion took effect in February 2014. On August 2, 2011, after a lengthy congressional debate over whether to raise the nations debt limit, Obama signed the bipartisan Budget Control Act of 2011. The legislation enforces limits on discretionary spending until 2021, establishes a procedure to increase the debt limit, creates a Congressional Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction to propose further deficit reduction with a stated goal of achieving at least 1.5trillion in budgetary savings over 10 years, and establishes automatic procedures for reducing spending by as much as 1.2trillion if legislation originating with the new joint select committee does not achieve such savings. By passing the legislation, Congress was able to prevent a U.S. government default on its obligations. US employment statistics during Obamas tenure as U.S. President As it did throughout 2008, the unemployment rate rose in 2009, reaching a peak in October at 10.0 and averaging 10.0 in the fourth quarter. Following a decrease to 9.7 in the first quarter of 2010, the unemployment rate fell to 9.6 in the second quarter, where it remained for the rest of the year. Between February and December 2010, employment rose by 0.8, which was less than the average of 1.9 experienced during comparable periods in the past four employment recoveries. By November 2012, the unemployment rate fell to 7.7, decreasing to 6.7 in the last month of 2013. During 2014, the unemployment rate continued to decline, falling to 6.3 in the first quarter. GDP growth returned in the third quarter of 2009, expanding at a rate of 1.6, followed by a 5.0 increase in the fourth quarter. Growth continued in 2010, posting an increase of 3.7 in the first quarter, with lesser gains throughout the rest of the year. In July 2010, the Federal Reserve noted that economic activity continued to increase, but its pace had slowed, and chairman Ben Bernanke said the economic outlook was unusually uncertain. Overall, the economy expanded at a rate of 2.9 in 2010. The Congressional Budget Office and a broad range of economists credit Obamas stimulus plan for economic growth. The CBO released a report stating that the stimulus bill increased employment by 1 2.1million, while conceding that It is impossible to determine how many of the reported jobs would have existed in the absence of the stimulus package. Although an April 2010 survey of members of the National Association for Business Economics showed an increase in job creation for the first time in two years, 73 of 68 respondents believed that the stimulus bill has had no impact on employment. The economy of the United States has grown faster than the other original NATO members by a wider margin under President Obama than it has anytime since the end of World War II.Politics that Work, U.S. GDP Growth Relative to Original NATO Members, Politics that Work , March 9, 2015 The OECD credits the much faster growth in the United States to the stimulus in the United States and the austerity measures in the European Union.Irene Chapple, OECD U.S. will recover faster, Europe faces unemployment crisis, CNN, May 29, 2013 Within a month of the 2010 midterm elections, Obama announced a compromise deal with the Congressional Republican leadership that included a temporary, twoyear extension of the 2001 and 2003 income tax rates, a oneyear payroll tax reduction, continuation of unemployment benefits, and a new rate and exemption amount for estate taxes. The compromise overcame opposition from some in both parties, and the resulting 858billion Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 passed with bipartisan majorities in both houses of Congress before Obama signed it on December 17, 2010. In December 2013, Obama declared that growing income inequality is a defining challenge of our time and called on Congress to bolster the safety net and raise wages. This came on the heels of the nationwide strikes of fastfood workers and Pope Francis criticism of inequality and trickledown economics. Obama has urged Congress to ratify a 12nation free trade pact called the TransPacific Partnership. Environmental policy Obama at a 2010 briefing on the BP oil spill at the Coast Guard Station Venice in Venice, Louisiana On September 30, 2009, the Obama administration proposed new regulations on power plants, factories, and oil refineries in an attempt to limit greenhouse gas emissions and to curb global warming. On April 20, 2010, an explosion destroyed an offshore drilling rig at the Macondo Prospect in the Gulf of Mexico, causing a major sustained oil leak. Obama visited the Gulf, announced a federal investigation, and formed a bipartisan commission to recommend new safety standards, after a review by Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar and concurrent Congressional hearings. He then announced a sixmonth moratorium on new deepwater drilling permits and leases, pending regulatory review. As multiple efforts by BP failed, some in the media and public expressed confusion and criticism over various aspects of the incident, and stated a desire for more involvement by Obama and the federal government. In July 2013, Obama expressed reservations and stated he would reject the Keystone XL pipeline if it increased carbon pollution or greenhouse emissions.Goldenberg, Suzanne . Barack Obama expresses reservations about Keystone XL pipeline project. The Guardian .Stein, Sam . Obama Keystone XL Should Not Be Approved If It Will Increase Greenhouse Gas Emissions. HuffPost . Obamas advisers called for a halt to petroleum exploration in the Arctic in January 2013.Goldenberg, Suzanne .Shells plans in Arctic at risk as Obama advisers call for halt to oil exploration. The Guardian . On February 24, 2015, Obama vetoed a bill that would authorize the pipeline. It was the third veto of Obamas presidency and his first major veto. Obama has emphasized the conservation of federal lands during his term in office. He used his power under the Antiquities Act to create 25 new national monuments during his presidency and expand four others, protecting a total of of federal lands and waters, more than any other U.S. president.Juliet Eilperin Brady Dennis, With new monuments in Nevada, Utah, Obama adds to his environmental legacy, The Washington Post . Monuments Man, The New York Times . Obamas Newly Designated National Monuments Upset Some Lawmakers, NPR, All Things Considered Amy R. Connolly, Obama expands public lands more than any U.S. president, United Press International . Health care reform Obama signs the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act at the White House, March 23, 2010 Obama called for Congress to pass legislation reforming health care in the United States, a key campaign promise and a top legislative goal. He proposed an expansion of health insurance coverage to cover the uninsured, to cap premium increases, and to allow people to retain their coverage when they leave or change jobs. His proposal was to spend 900billion over 10 years and include a government insurance plan, also known as the public option, to compete with the corporate insurance sector as a main component to lowering costs and improving quality of health care. It would also make it illegal for insurers to drop sick people or deny them coverage for preexisting conditions, and require every American to carry health coverage. The plan also includes medical spending cuts and taxes on insurance companies that offer expensive plans. Maximum OutofPocket Premium as Percentage of Family Income and federal poverty level, under Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, starting in 2014 On July 14, 2009, House Democratic leaders introduced a 1,017page plan for overhauling the U.S. health care system, which Obama wanted Congress to approve by the end of 2009. After much public debate during the Congressional summer recess of 2009, Obama delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress on September 9 where he addressed concerns over the proposals. In March 2009, Obama lifted a ban on using federal funds for stem cell research. On November 7, 2009, a health care bill featuring the public option was passed in the House. On December 24, 2009, the Senate passed its own bill without a public option on a partyline vote of 60 39. On March 21, 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act passed by the Senate in December was passed in the House by a vote of 219 to 212. Obama signed the bill into law on March 23, 2010. The ACA includes healthrelated provisions, most of which took effect in 2014, including expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making up to 133of the federal poverty level starting in 2014, subsidizing insurance premiums for people making up to 400of the FPL so their maximum outofpocket payment for annual premiums will be from 2 to 9.5 of income, providing incentives for businesses to provide health care benefits, prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on preexisting conditions, establishing health insurance exchanges, prohibiting annual coverage caps, and support for medical research. According to White House and Congressional Budget Office figures, the maximum share of income that enrollees would have to pay would vary depending on their income relative to the federal poverty level. Percentage of Individuals in the United States without Health Insurance, 1963 2015 The costs of these provisions are offset by taxes, fees, and costsaving measures, such as new Medicare taxes for those in highincome brackets, taxes on indoor tanning, cuts to the Medicare Advantage program in favor of traditional Medicare, and fees on medical devices and pharmaceutical companies there is also a tax penalty for those who do not obtain health insurance, unless they are exempt due to low income or other reasons. In March 2010, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that the net effect of both laws will be a reduction in the federal deficit by 143billion over the first decade. The law faced several legal challenges, primarily based on the argument that an individual mandate requiring Americans to buy health insurance was unconstitutional. On June 28, 2012, the Supreme Court ruled by a 5 4 vote in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius that the mandate was constitutional under the U.S. Congresss taxing authority. In Burwell v. Hobby Lobby the Court ruled that closelyheld forprofit corporations could be exempt on religious grounds under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act from regulations adopted under the ACA that would have required them to pay for insurance that covered certain contraceptives. In June 2015, the Court ruled 6 3 in King v. Burwell that subsidies to help individuals and families purchase health insurance were authorized for those doing so on both the federal exchange and state exchanges, not only those purchasing plans established by the State, as the statute reads. Energy policy Prior to June 2014, Obama offered substantial support for a broadlybased All of the above approach to domestic energy policy, which Obama has maintained since his first term and which he last confirmed at his State of the Union speech in January 2014 to a mixed reception by both parties. In June 2014, Obama made indications that his administration would consider a shift towards an energy policy more closely tuned to the manufacturing industry and its impact on the domestic economy. Obamas approach of selectively combining regulation and incentive to various issues in the domestic energy policy such as coal mining and oil fracking has received mixed commentary for not being as responsive to the needs of the domestic manufacturing sector as needed, following claims that the domestic manufacturing sector utilizes as much as a third of the nations available energy resources.Obama domestic energy policy. Bloomberg News. June 17, 2014. Gun control Obama visiting 2012 Aurora shooting victims at University of Colorado Hospital On January 16, 2013, one month after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, Obama signed 23 executive orders and outlined a series of sweeping proposals regarding gun control. He urged Congress to reintroduce an expired ban on militarystyle assault weapons, such as those used in several recent mass shootings, impose limits on ammunition magazines to 10 rounds, introduce background checks on all gun sales, pass a ban on possession and sale of armorpiercing bullets, introduce harsher penalties for guntraffickers, especially unlicensed dealers who buy arms for criminals and approving the appointment of the head of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives for the first time since 2006. On January 5, 2016, Obama announced new executive actions extending background check requirements to more gun sellers.Obama announces gun control executive action CNN. January 5, 2016. January 7, 2016. In a 2016 editorial in the New York Times , Obama compared the struggle for what he termed commonsense gun reform to womens suffrage and other civil rights movements in American history.Obama, Barack. Barack Obama Guns Are Our Shared Responsibility The New York Times . January 7, 2016. January 7, 2016. 2010 midterm elections Obama called the November 2, 2010 election, where the Democratic Party lost 63 seats in, and control of, the House of Representatives, humbling and a shellacking. He said that the results came because not enough Americans had felt the effects of the economic recovery. Cybersecurity and Internet policy On November 10, 2014, President Obama recommended the Federal Communications Commission reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service in order to preserve net neutrality. On February 12, 2013, President Obama signed Executive Order 13636, Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity. Foreign policy altPresident Obama stands at a podium delivering a speech on A New Beginning at Cairo University on June 4, 2009 International trips made by President Barack Obama during his terms in office Obama visiting the Rijksmuseum with Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte, 2014 In February and March 2009, Vice President Joe Biden and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton made separate overseas trips to announce a new era in U.S. foreign relations with Russia and Europe, using the terms break and reset to signal major changes from the policies of the preceding administration. Obama attempted to reach out to Arab leaders by granting his first interview to an Arab cable TV network, Al Arabiya. On March 19, Obama continued his outreach to the Muslim world, releasing a New Years video message to the people and government of Iran. In April, Obama gave a speech in Ankara, Turkey, which was well received by many Arab governments. On June 4, 2009, Obama delivered a speech at Cairo University in Egypt calling for A New Beginning in relations between the Islamic world and the United States and promoting Middle East peace. On June 26, 2009, Obama responded to the Iranian governments actions towards protesters following Irans 2009 presidential election by saying The violence perpetrated against them is outrageous. We see it and we condemn it. While in Moscow on July 7, he responded Vice President Bidens comment on a possible Israeli military strike on Iran by saying We have said directly to the Israelis that it is important to try and resolve this in an international setting in a way that does not create major conflict in the Middle East. On September 24, 2009, Obama became the first sitting U.S. President to preside over a meeting of the United Nations Security Council. In March 2010, Obama took a public stance against plans by the government of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to continue building Jewish housing projects in predominantly Arab neighborhoods of East Jerusalem. During the same month, an agreement was reached with the administration of Russian President Dmitry Medvedev to replace the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with a new pact reducing the number of longrange nuclear weapons in the arsenals of both countries by about onethird.Baker, Peter .Obama Seals Arms Control Deal With Russia. The New York Times . Obama and Medvedev signed the New START treaty in April 2010, and the U.S. Senate ratified it in December 2010. In December 2011, Obama instructed agencies to consider LGBT rights when issuing financial aid to foreign countries. He criticized Russias law discriminating against gays in August 2013, stopping short of advocating a boycott of the 2014 Winter Olympics held in Sochi, Russia. Obama meeting with Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi at the White House, October 2016 In December 2014, Obama announced that he intended to normalize relationships between Cuba and the United States. The countries respective interests sections in one anothers capitals were upgraded to embassies on July 20, 2015. In March 2015, Obama declared that he had authorized U.S. forces to provide logistical and intelligence support to the Saudis in their military intervention in Yemen, establishing a Joint Planning Cell with Saudi Arabia. Before leaving office, Obama said German Chancellor Angela Merkel had been his closest international partner throughout his tenure as President. War in Iraq On February 27, 2009, Obama announced that combat operations in Iraq would end within 18 months. His remarks were made to a group of Marines preparing for deployment to Afghanistan. Obama said, Let me say this as plainly as I can by August 31, 2010, our combat mission in Iraq will end. The Obama administration scheduled the withdrawal of combat troops to be completed by August 2010, decreasing troops levels from 142,000 while leaving a transitional force of about 50,000 in Iraq until the end of 2011. On August 19, 2010, the last U.S. combat brigade exited Iraq. Remaining troops transitioned from combat operations to counterterrorism and the training, equipping, and advising of Iraqi security forces. On August 31, 2010, Obama announced that the United States combat mission in Iraq was over. On October 21, 2011 President Obama announced that all U.S. troops would leave Iraq in time to be home for the holidays. altUS President Barack Obama and British Prime Minister David Cameron trade bottles of beer to settle a bet they made on the U.S. vs. England World Cup Soccer game , during a bilateral meeting at the G20 Summit in Toronto, Canada, Saturday, June 26, 2010 In June 2014, following the capture of Mosul by ISIS, Obama sent 275 troops to provide support and security for U.S. personnel and the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad. ISIS continued to gain ground and to commit widespread massacres and ethnic cleansing. In August 2014, during the Sinjar massacre, Obama ordered a campaign of U.S. airstrikes against ISIS. By the end of 2014, 3,100 American ground troops were committed to the conflict and 16,000 sorties were flown over the battlefield, primarily by U.S. Air Force and Navy pilots. In the spring of 2015, with the addition of the Panther Brigade of the 82nd Airborne Division the number of U.S. ground troops in Iraq surged to 4,400, and by July Americanled coalition air forces counted 44,000 sorties over the battlefield. War in Afghanistan Early in his presidency, Obama moved to bolster U.S. troop strength in Afghanistan. He announced an increase in U.S. troop levels to 17,000 military personnel in February 2009 to stabilize a deteriorating situation in Afghanistan, an area he said had not received the strategic attention, direction and resources it urgently requires. He replaced the military commander in Afghanistan, General David D. McKiernan, with former Special Forces commander Lt. Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal in May 2009, indicating that McChrystals Special Forces experience would facilitate the use of counterinsurgency tactics in the war. On December 1, 2009, Obama announced the deployment of an additional 30,000 military personnel to Afghanistan and proposed to begin troop withdrawals 18 months from that dateAssociated Press. . Obama details Afghan war plan, troop increases MSNBC. this took place in July 2011. David Petraeus replaced McChrystal in June 2010, after McChrystals staff criticized White House personnel in a magazine article. In February 2013, Obama said the U.S. military would reduce the troop level in Afghanistan from 68,000 to 34,000 U.S. troops by February 2014. In October 2015, the White House announced a plan to keep U.S. Forces in Afghanistan indefinitely in light of the deteriorating security situation. Israel altPresident Barack Obama, at left, shakes hands with Israeli President Shimon Peres, at right, in the Oval Office on Tuesday, May 5, 2009. Standing at right looking on is U.S. Vice President Joe Biden. In 2011, the United States vetoed a Security Council resolution condemning Israeli settlements, with the United States being the only nation to do so. Obama supports the twostate solution to the Arab Israeli conflict based on the 1967 borders with land swaps.Levy, Elior . PA challenges Netanyahu to accept 1967 lines. Ynetnews . Retrieved May 22, 2011. In June 2011, Obama said that the bond between the United States and Israel is unbreakable. During the initial years of the Obama administration, the U.S. increased military cooperation with Israel, including increased military aid, reestablishment of the U.S.Israeli Joint Political Military Group and the Defense Policy Advisory Group, and an increase in visits among highlevel military officials of both countries.Levinson, Charles .U.S., Israel Build Military Cooperation. The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved March 1, 2011. The Obama administration asked Congress to allocate money toward funding the Iron Dome program in response to the waves of Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel. In 2013, Jeffrey Goldberg reported that, in Obamas view, with each new settlement announcement, Netanyahu is moving his country down a path toward neartotal isolation. In 2014, Obama likened the Zionist movement to the Civil Rights Movement in the United States. He said that both movements seek to bring justice and equal rights to historically persecuted peoples. He explained, To me, being proIsrael and proJewish is part and parcel with the values that Ive been fighting for since I was politically conscious and started getting involved in politics.Goldberg, Jeffrey. After the Iran Deal Obama, Netanyahu, and the Future of the Jewish State. The Atlantic . September 13, 2015. September 13, 2015. Obama expressed support for Israels right to defend itself during the 2014 Israel Gaza conflict. On December 23, 2016 under the Obama Administration, the United States abstained from United Nations Security Council Resolution 2334, effectively allowing it to pass. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu strongly criticized the Administrations actions, and the Israeli government withdrew its annual dues from the organization, which totaled 6million in United States dollars, on January 6, 2017. On January 5, 2017, the United States House of Representatives voted 342 80 to condemn the UN Resolution. Libya President Obama meets with Russian President Vladimir Putin to discuss Syria and ISIS, September 29, 2015 In February 2011, protests in Libya began against longtime dictator Muammar Gaddafi as part of the Arab Spring. They soon turned violent. In March, as forces loyal to Gaddafi advanced on rebels across Libya, calls for a nofly zone came from around the world, including Europe, the Arab League, and a resolution passed unanimously by the U.S. Senate. In response to the unanimous passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 on March 17, Gaddafi who had previously vowed to show no mercy to the rebels of Benghazi announced an immediate cessation of military activities, yet reports came in that his forces continued shelling Misrata. The next day, on Obamas orders, the U.S. military took part in air strikes to destroy the Libyan governments air defense capabilities to protect civilians and enforce a noflyzone, including the use of Tomahawk missiles, B2 Spirits, and fighter jets. Six days later, on March 25, by unanimous vote of all of its 28 members, NATO took over leadership of the effort, dubbed Operation Unified Protector. Some Representatives questioned whether Obama had the constitutional authority to order military action in addition to questioning its cost, structure and aftermath. Syrian Civil War On August 18, 2011, several months after the start of the Syrian Civil War, Obama issued a written statement that said The time has come for President Assad to step aside.President Obama The future of Syria must be determined by its people, but President Bashar alAssad is standing in their way. White House website, August 18, 2011. This stance was reaffirmed in November 2015. In 2012, Obama authorized multiple programs run by the CIA and the Pentagon to train antiAssad rebels. The Pentagonrun program was later found to have failed and was formally abandoned in October 2015. In the wake of a chemical weapons attack in Syria, formally blamed by the Obama administration on the Assad government, Obama chose not to enforce the red line he had pledged and, rather than authorise the promised military action against Assad, went along with the Russiabrokered deal that led to Assad giving up chemical weapons however attacks with chlorine gas continued. In 2014, Obama authorized an air campaign aimed primarily at ISIL, but repeatedly promised that the U.S. would not deploy ground troops in Syria. Death of Osama bin Laden FilePresident Obama on Death of Osama bin Laden.ogvthumbPresident Obamas address Also available Audio only altPresident Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden, along with members of the national security team, receive an update on Operation Neptunes Spear, a mission against Osama bin Laden, in one of the conference rooms of the Situation Room of the White House, on May 1, 2011. They are watching live feed from drones operating over the bin Laden complex. Starting with information received from Central Intelligence Agency operatives in July 2010, the CIA developed intelligence over the next several months that determined what they believed to be the hideout of Osama bin Laden. He was living in seclusion in a large compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, a suburban area from Islamabad. CIA head Leon Panetta reported this intelligence to President Obama in March 2011. Meeting with his national security advisers over the course of the next six weeks, Obama rejected a plan to bomb the compound, and authorized a surgical raid to be conducted by United States Navy SEALs. The operation took place on May 1, 2011, and resulted in the shooting death of bin Laden and the seizure of papers, computer drives and disks from the compound. DNA testing was one of five methods used to positively identify bin Ladens corpse, which was buried at sea several hours later. Within minutes of the Presidents announcement from Washington, DC, late in the evening on May 1, there were spontaneous celebrations around the country as crowds gathered outside the White House, and at New York Citys Ground Zero and Times Square. Reaction to the announcement was positive across party lines, including from former presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, and from many countries around the world. Iran nuclear talks Obama talks with Benjamin Netanyahu, March 2013 In November 2013, Obamas administration opened negotiations with Iran to prevent it from acquiring nuclear weapons, which included an interim agreement. Negotiations took two years with numerous delays, with a deal being announced July 14, 2015. The deal, titled the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, saw the removal of sanctions in exchange for measures that would prevent Iran from producing nuclear weapons. While Obama hailed the agreement as being a step towards a more hopeful world, the deal drew strong criticism from Republican and conservative quarters, and from Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Relations with Cuba President Obama meeting with Cuban President Ral Castro in Panama, April 2015 Since the spring of 2013, secret meetings were conducted between the United States and Cuba in the neutral locations of Canada and Vatican City. The Vatican first became involved in 2013 when Pope Francis advised the U.S. and Cuba to exchange prisoners as a gesture of goodwill. On December 10, 2013, Cuban President Ral Castro, in a significant public moment, greeted and shook hands with Obama at the Nelson Mandela memorial service in Johannesburg. In December 2014, after the secret meetings, it was announced that Obama, with Pope Francis as an intermediary, had negotiated a restoration of relations with Cuba, after nearly sixty years of dtente. Popularly dubbed the Cuban Thaw, The New Republic deemed the Cuban Thaw to be Obamas finest foreign policy achievement. The New Republic , The Cuban Thaw Is Obamas Finest Foreign Policy Achievement to Date, by Joel Gillin, April 13, 2015. On July 1, 2015, President Barack Obama announced that formal diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States would resume, and embassies would be opened in Washington and Havana. The countries respective interests sections in one anothers capitals were upgraded to embassies on July 20 and August 13, 2015, respectively. Obama visited Havana, Cuba for two days in March 2016, becoming the first sitting U.S. President to arrive since Calvin Coolidge in 1928. Africa Obama spoke in front of the African Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on July 29, 2015, the first sitting U.S. president to do so. He gave a speech encouraging the world to increase economic ties via investments and trade with the continent, and lauded the progresses made in education, infrastructure, and economy. He also criticized the lack of democracy and leaders who refuse to step aside, discrimination against minorities , and corruption. He suggested an intensified democratization and free trade, to significantly improve the quality of life for Africans. During his July 2015 trip, Obama also was the first U.S. president ever to visit Kenya, which is the homeland of his father. Hiroshima speech On May 27, 2016, 2 months before the 71st anniversary of the U.S. atomic bombing of Hiroshima that ended World War II, Obama became the first sitting American president to visit Hiroshima, Japan. Accompanied by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Obama paid tribute to the victims of the bombing at the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum. Russia Obama meets Russian President Vladimir Putin in September 2015. After Russias invasion of Crimea in 2014, military intervention in Syria in 2015, and the interference in the 2016 presidential election in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, Obamas Russia policy was widely seen as a failure. George Robertson, a former UK defense secretary and NATO secretarygeneral, said that Obama had allowed Putin to jump back on the world stage and test the resolve of the West, adding that the legacy of this disaster would last. Cultural and political image altFirst official presidential portrait of Barack Obama, wearing a black suit with a blue tie and American flag lapel pin, indoors with the American flag and the flag of the President draped in the background Obamas family history, upbringing, and Ivy League education differ markedly from those of AfricanAmerican politicians who launched their careers in the 1960s through participation in the civil rights movement. See also Expressing puzzlement over questions about whether he is black enough, Obama told an August 2007 meeting of the National Association of Black Journalists that were still locked in this notion that if you appeal to white folks then there must be something wrong. Obama acknowledged his youthful image in an October 2007 campaign speech, saying I wouldnt be here if, time and again, the torch had not been passed to a new generation. See also Obama is frequently referred to as an exceptional orator. During his preinauguration transition period and continuing into his presidency, Obama delivered a series of weekly Internet video addresses. Former presidential campaign surrogate and Georgetown professor, Michael Eric Dyson, is both critical and sympathetic of President Obamas leadership in race relations, indicating that Obamas speeches and action on racial disparity and justice have been somewhat reactive and reluctant when, especially in the later part of his second term, racial violence demanded immediate presidential action and conversation.Dyson, Michael Eric. . The Black Presidency Barack Obama and the Politics of Race in America. New York Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 275. . Presidential approval ratings According to the Gallup Organization, Obama began his presidency with a 68 approval rating before gradually declining for the rest of the year, and eventually bottoming out at 41 in August 2010, a trend similar to Ronald Reagans and Bill Clintons first years in office. He experienced a small poll bounce shortly after the death of Osama bin Laden on May 2, 2011. This bounce lasted until around June 2011, when his approval numbers dropped back to where they were previously. His approval ratings rebounded around the same time as his reelection in 2012, with polls showing an average job approval of 52 shortly after his second inauguration. Despite approval ratings dropping to 39 in late2013 due to the ACA rollout, they climbed to 50 in January 2015 according to Gallup. Polls showed strong support for Obama in other countries both before and during his presidency. In a February 2009 poll conducted in Western Europe and the U.S. by Harris Interactive for France 24 and the International Herald Tribune , Obama was rated as the most respected world leader, as well as the most powerful. In a similar poll conducted by Harris in May 2009, Obama was rated as the most popular world leader, as well as the one figure most people would pin their hopes on for pulling the world out of the economic downturn. altPrime Minister David Cameron of the United Kingdom, President Barack Obama, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, Jos Manuel Barroso, President of the European Commission, President Franois Hollande of France and others react emotionally while watching the overtime shootout of the Chelsea vs. Bayern Munich Champions League final, in the Laurel Cabin conference room during the G8 Summit at Camp David, Maryland, May 19, 2012. Cameron raises his arms triumphantly as the Chelsea team wins their first Champions League title in the overtime shootout. Obama won Best Spoken Word Album Grammy Awards for abridged audiobook versions of Dreams from My Father in February 2006 and for The Audacity of Hope in February 2008. His concession speech after the New Hampshire primary was set to music by independent artists as the music video Yes We Can, which was viewed 10million times on YouTube in its first month and received a Daytime Emmy Award. In December 2008 and in 2012, Time magazine named Obama as its Person of the Year. The 2008 awarding was for his historic candidacy and election, which Time described as the steady march of seemingly impossible accomplishments. On May 25, 2011, Obama became the first President of the United States to address both houses of the UK Parliament in Westminster Hall, London. This was only the fifth occurrence since the start of the 20th century of a head of state being extended this invitation, following Charles de Gaulle in 1960, Nelson Mandela in 1996, Queen Elizabeth II in 2002 and Pope Benedict XVI in 2010. On October 9, 2009, the Norwegian Nobel Committee announced that Obama had won the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize for his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples. Obama accepted this award in Oslo, Norway on December 10, 2009, with deep gratitude and great humility. The award drew a mixture of praise and criticism from world leaders and media figures. Obamas peace prize was called a stunning surprise by The New York Times . Obama is the fourth U.S. president to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and the third to become a Nobel laureate while in office. Obamas Nobel Prize has been viewed skeptically in subsequent years, especially after the director of the Nobel Institute, Geir Lundestad, said Obamas Peace Prize did not have the desired effect. Postpresidency Obama, with Joe Biden and Donald Trump at the latters inauguration on January 20, 2017 Barack Obamas presidency ended at noon on January 20, 2017, immediately following the inauguration of his Republican successor, Donald Trump. After the inauguration, Obama lifted off on Executive One, circled the White House, and flew to Joint Base Andrews. The family currently rents a house in Kalorama, Washington, D.C. During the 2017 Democratic National Committee chairmanship election, worrying about the rise of Keith Ellison and Bernie Sanderss endorsement of him for the position, the Obama administration pushed Tom Perez to run against him. President Barack Obama personally called DNC members to vote for Perez. On March 2, 2017, the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum awarded the annual Profile in Courage Award to Obama for his enduring commitment to democratic ideals and elevating the standard of political courage. On April 24, 2017, in his first public appearance out of office, Obama appeared at a seminar at the University of Chicago aimed at the engagement with a new generation as well as an appeal for their participation in politics. On May 4, 2017, three days ahead of the French presidential election, Obama publicly endorsed Emmanuel Macron He appeals to peoples hopes and not their fears, and I enjoyed speaking to Emmanuel recently to hear about his independent movement and his vision for the future of France. Macron went on to win the election. On May 9, 2017, Obama delivered a speech urging for election participation and research during a food innovation summit in Milan, Italy, saying in part, if you dont vote and you dont pay attention, youll get policies that dont reflect your interest. While in Berlin on May 25, 2017, Obama made a joint public appearance with Chancellor Angela Merkel where he stressed inclusion and for leaders to question themselves, Obama having been formally invited to Berlin while still in office as part of an effort to boost Merkels reelection campaign. Obama traveled to Kensington Palace in England and met with Prince Harry on May 27, 2017 Obama tweeted afterward that the two discussed their foundations and offering condolences in the wake of the Manchester Arena bombing that occurred five days prior. On June 1, 2017, after President Trump announced his withdrawal of the United States from the Paris Agreement, Obama released a statement disagreeing with the choice But even in the absence of American leadership even as this administration joins a small handful of nations that reject the future Im confident that our states, cities, and businesses will step up and do even more to lead the way, and help protect for future generations the one planet weve got. During an appearance at the Seoul conference on July 3, Obama said the Paris Agreement will still be a critical factor in helping our children solve the enormous challenge in civilization. After the Congressional baseball shooting, Obama telephoned Senator Jeff Flake to express condolences for the victims and to request Flake inform House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, injured during the shooting, of his sentiments for him. On June 22, 2017, after Senate Republicans revealed the Better Care Reconciliation Act of 2017, their discussion draft of a health care bill to replace the Affordable Care Act, Obama released a Facebook post calling the bill a massive transfer of wealth from middleclass and poor families to the richest people in America. On September 19, while delivering the keynote address at Goalkeepers, Obama admitted his frustration with Republicans backing a bill that will raise costs, reduce coverage, and roll back protections for older Americans and people with preexisting conditions. On September 5, 2017, after Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced the termination of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, Obama released a Facebook post rebuking the decision. On September 7, 2017, Obama partnered with former presidents Jimmy Carter, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities. On October 31, 2017, Obama hosted the inaugural summit of the Obama Foundation in Chicago. Obama intends for the foundation to be the central focus of his postpresidency and part of his ambitions for his subsequent activities following his presidency to be more consequential than his time in office. Presidential library The Obama Presidential Center is the planned presidential library of Barack Obama. The center will be hosted by the University of Chicago, and will be located in Jackson Park on the South Side of Chicago, Illinois. Legacy Job growth during the presidency of Obama compared to predecessors, as measured as cumulative percentage change from month after inauguration to end of his term Obamas most significant legacy is generally considered to be the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, provisions of which went into effect from 2010 to 2020. Together with the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act amendment, it represents the U.S. healthcare systems most significant regulatory overhaul and expansion of coverage since the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. Many commentators credit Obama with averting a threatened depression and pulling the economy back from the Great Recession. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Obama administration created 11.3million jobs from the month after the first inauguration of Barack Obama to the end of his term. In 2009, President Obama signed into law the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010, which contained in it the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act, the first addition to existing federal hate crime law in the United States since Democratic President Bill Clinton signed into law the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996. The Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act expanded existing federal hate crime laws in the United States to apply to crimes motivated by a victims actual or perceived gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability, and dropped the prerequisite that the victim be engaging in a federally protected activity. In 2010, President Obama signed into effect the Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Passed as a response to the financial crisis of 2007 08, it brought the most significant changes to financial regulation in the United States since the regulatory reform that followed the Great Depression under Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt. As president, Obama advanced LGBT rights.David Crary, LGBT activists view Obama as staunch champion of their cause, Associated Press . In 2010, Obama signed the Dont Ask, Dont Tell Repeal Act, which brought an end to dont ask, dont tell policy in the U.S. armed forces that banned open service from LGB people the law went into effect the following year.Elisabeth Bumiller, Obama Ends Dont Ask, Dont Tell Policy, The New York Times . In 2016, the Obama administration brought an end to the ban on transgender people serving openly in the US armed forces. A Gallup poll, taken in the final days of Obamas term, showed that 68 of Americans believed that the U.S. had made progress in the situation for gays and lesbians during Obamas eight years in office.Michael Smith Frank Newport, Americans Assess Progress Under Obama, The Gallup Organization . President Obama continued the drone strikes that President George W. Bush started during his presidency in Afghanistan, Iraq, Pakistan, Somalia, and Yemen. Obama also ordered drone strikes in Libya in 2011, the Philippines in 2012, and Syria in 2014. Obama left about 9,800 US troops in Afghanistan, 5,262 US troops in Iraq, 503 US troops in Syria, 133 US troops in Pakistan, 106 US troops in Somalia, 7 US troops in Yemen, and 2 US troops in Libya at the end of his presidency. According to Pew Research Center and United States Bureau of Justice Statistics, from December 31, 2009 to December 31, 2015, that inmates sentenced in US federal custody declined by 5 under US President Obama. This is the largest decline in sentenced inmates in US federal custody since Democrat US President Jimmy Carter. By contrast, the federal prison population increased significantly under US presidents Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush. Obama left office in January 2017 with a 60 approval rating. A 2017 CSPAN Presidential Historians Survey ranked Obama as the 12th best US president. Books written Dreams from My Father , 1995 The Audacity of Hope , 2006 Of Thee I Sing , 2010 Audiobooks 2006 The Audacity of Hope Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream , Random House Audio, See also United States Senate career of Barack Obama Presidency of Barack Obama First 100 days of Barack Obamas presidency Timeline of the presidency of Barack Obama Timeline of the presidency of Barack Obama Timeline of the presidency of Barack Obama Timeline of the presidency of Barack Obama Timeline of the presidency of Barack Obama Timeline of the presidency of Barack Obama Timeline of the presidency of Barack Obama Timeline of the presidency of Barack Obama Timeline of the presidency of Barack Obama Politics Political positions of Barack Obama Social policy of Barack Obama American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 DREAM Act Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 List of international presidential trips made by Barack Obama Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009 National Broadband Plan Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act SPEECH Act Stay with It Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 White House Office of Energy and Climate Change Policy Other Speeches of Barack Obama Barack Obama Presidential Center Roberts Court Lists Assassination threats against Barack Obama List of people pardoned by Barack Obama Federal political scandals, 2009 17 List of Barack Obama presidential campaign endorsements, 2008 List of Barack Obama presidential campaign endorsements, 2012 List of AfricanAmerican United States Senators List of things named after Barack Obama Notes and references Notes References Further reading External links Official of The Office of Barack and Michelle Obama of The Obama Foundation of the Barack Obama Presidential Library of Organizing for Action White House biography Other Obama B. United States Health Care Reform Progress to Date and Next Steps. JAMA . Published online July 11, 2016. . Teague Beckwith, Ryan . Read Barack Obamas Statement on the Anniversary of Obamacare . Time Magazine. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017. Retrieved March 31, 2017. See also Taylor, Jessica . Obama America Is Stronger Because Of The Affordable Care Act . National Public Radio. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017. Retrieved March 31, 2017. Obama B. The Presidents Role in Advancing Criminal Justice Reform. Harvard Law Review . Published January 5, 2017. Collected news and commentary at the Tampa Bay Timess PolitiFact.com Collected news and commentary at The Washington Post s Fact Checker blog Barack Obama is officially one of the most consequential presidents in American history by Vox author Dylan Matthews on March 24, 2017. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved April 2, 2017. The article describes the successes and failures of Barack Obamas domestic and foreign policy as well as provides articles for further reading in this context. Category1961 births Category20thcentury American writers Category20thcentury scholars Category21stcentury American politicians Category21stcentury American writers Category21stcentury scholars CategoryActivists from Illinois CategoryAfricanAmerican feminists CategoryAfricanAmerican nonfiction writers CategoryAmerican nonfiction writers CategoryAfricanAmerican people in Illinois politics CategoryAfricanAmerican United States presidential candidates CategoryAfricanAmerican United States Senators CategoryAmerican civil rights lawyers CategoryAmerican community activists CategoryAmerican feminist writers CategoryAmerican feminists CategoryAmerican legal scholars CategoryAmerican Nobel laureates CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of French descent CategoryAmerican people of German descent CategoryAmerican people of Irish descent CategoryAmerican people of Luo descent CategoryAmerican people of Scottish descent CategoryAmerican people of Swiss descent CategoryAmerican people of Welsh descent CategoryAmerican political writers CategoryAmerican politicians of Luo descent CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryColumbia University alumni CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party United States Senators CategoryGrammy Award winners CategoryHarvard Law School alumni CategoryIllinois Democrats CategoryIllinois State Senators CategoryLiving people CategoryMale feminists CategoryNobel Peace Prize laureates Barack CategoryOccidental College alumni CategoryPoliticians from Chicago CategoryPoliticians from Honolulu CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryPunahou School alumni CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 2008 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 2012 CategoryUnited States Senators from Illinois CategoryUniversity of Chicago Law School faculty CategoryWashington, D.C. Democrats CategoryWriters fromChicago
George Walker Bush is an American politician who served as the 43rd President of the United States from 2001 to 2009. He was also the 46th Governor of Texas from 1995 to 2000. After graduating from Yale University in 1968 and Harvard Business School in 1975, he worked in the oil industry. Bush married Laura Welch in 1977 and ran unsuccessfully for the House of Representatives shortly thereafter. He later coowned the Texas Rangers baseball team before defeating Ann Richards in the 1994 Texas gubernatorial election. Bush was elected president in 2000 after a close and controversial win over Democratic rival Al Gore, becoming the fourth president to be elected while receiving fewer popular votes than his opponent. From a prominent political family, he is the eldest son of Barbara and George H. W. Bush, the 41st President of the United States, making him only the second president to assume the nations highest office after his father, following the lead of John Quincy Adams. His brother, Jeb Bush, a former Governor of Florida, was a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in the 2016 presidential election. His paternal grandfather, Prescott Bush, was a United States Senator from Connecticut. The September 11 terrorist attacks occurred eight months into Bushs first term as president. Bush responded with what became known as the Bush Doctrine launching a War on Terror, an international military campaign that included the war in Afghanistan in 2001 and the Iraq War in 2003. He also promoted policies on the economy, health care, education, Social Security reform, and amending the Constitution to prohibit samesex marriage. He signed into law broad tax cuts, the Patriot Act, the No Child Left Behind Act, the PartialBirth Abortion Ban Act, Medicare prescription drug benefits for seniors, and funding for the AIDS relief program known as PEPFAR. His tenure included national debates on immigration, Social Security, electronic surveillance, and torture. In the 2004 Presidential race, Bush defeated Democratic Senator John Kerry in another relatively close election. After his reelection, Bush received increasingly heated criticism from across the political spectrumBaker, Kevin, for his handling of the Iraq War, Hurricane Katrina, and other challenges. Amid this criticism, the Democratic Party regained control of Congress in the 2006 elections. In December 2007, the United States entered its longest postWorld War II recession, often referred to as the Great Recession, prompting the Bush administration to obtain congressional passage of multiple economic programs intended to preserve the countrys financial system. Nationally, Bush was both one of the most popular and unpopular presidents in history, having received the highest recorded presidential approval ratings in the wake of the September 11 attacks, as well as one of the lowest approval ratings during the 2008 financial crisis. Bush left office in 2009, returning to Texas where he purchased a home in Dallas. In 2010, he published his memoir, Decision Points . His presidential library was opened in 2013. His presidency has been ranked among the worst in historians polls published in the late 2000s and 2010s. Early life and career George W. Bush with his parents, Barbara and George H. W. Bush, 1947, when Harry Truman was the president George Walker Bush was born on July 6, 1946, at GraceNew Haven Hospital in New Haven, Connecticut, as the first child of George Herbert Walker Bush and his wife, the former Barbara Pierce. He was raised in Midland and Houston, Texas, with four siblings, Jeb, Neil, Marvin and Dorothy. Another younger sister, Robin, died from leukemia at the age of three in 1953. His grandfather, Prescott Bush, was a U.S. Senator from Connecticut. His father, George H.W. Bush, was Ronald Reagans Vice President from 1981 to 1989 and the 41st U.S. President from 1989 to 1993. Bush has English and some German ancestry, along with more distant Dutch, Welsh, Irish, French, and Scottish roots. Education Bush attended public schools in Midland, Texas, until the family moved to Houston after he had completed seventh grade. He then spent two years at The Kinkaid School, a prep school in Houston.Bush, then the Governor of Texas, was the commencement speaker at St. Johns Academy in 1995 Bush attended high school at Phillips Academy, a boarding school in Andover, Massachusetts, where he played baseball and was the head cheerleader during his senior year. He attended Yale University from 1964 to 1968, graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree in history. During this time, he was a cheerleader and a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon, serving as the president of the fraternity during his senior year. Bush became a member of the Skull and Bones society as a senior.Bush, George W., A Charge to Keep , Bush was a rugby union player and was on Yales 1st XV.Cain, Nick Growden, Greg Chapter 21 Ten Peculiar Facts about Rugby in Rugby Union for Dummies , Chichester John Wiley and Sons, p. 297 He characterized himself as an average student. His GPA during his first three years at Yale was 77, and he had a similar average under a nonnumeric rating system in his final year. Beginning in the fall of 1973, Bush attended Harvard Business School. He graduated in 1975 with an MBA degree. He is the only U.S. president to have earned an MBA.John Solomon, Bush, Harvard Business School and the Makings of a President, New York Times . See also James P. Pfiffner, The First MBA President George W. Bush as Public Administrator, Public Administration Review , p. 7. Family and personal life At a backyard barbecue in 1977, friends introduced him to Laura Welch, a school teacher and librarian. After a threemonth courtship, she accepted his marriage proposal and they wed on November 5 of that year. The couple settled in Midland, Texas. Bush left his familys Episcopal Church to join his wifes United Methodist Church. On November 25, 1981, Laura Bush gave birth to fraternal twin daughters, Barbara and Jenna. George and Laura Bush with their daughters Jenna and Barbara, 1990 Prior to his marriage, Bush had multiple episodes of alcohol abuse. In one instance on September 4, 1976, he was arrested near his familys summer home in Kennebunkport, Maine for driving under the influence of alcohol. He pleaded guilty, was fined 150, and had his Maine drivers license briefly suspended. Bush said his wife has had a stabilizing effect on his life, and attributes his 1986 decision to give up alcohol to her influence. While Governor of Texas, Bush said of his wife, I saw an elegant, beautiful woman who turned out not only to be elegant and beautiful, but very smart and willing to put up with my rough edges, and I must confess has smoothed them off over time. Bush has been an avid reader throughout his adult life, preferring biographies and histories. During his time as president, Bush read the Bible daily. He also read 14 Lincoln biographies, and during the last three years of his presidency, he reportedly read 186 books. Walt Harrington, a journalist, recalled seeing books by John Fowles, F. Scott Fitzgerald, James Joyce, and Gore Vidal lying about, as well as biographies of Willa Cather and Queen Victoria in his home when Bush was a Texas oilman. Other activities include cigar smoking and golf. Since leaving the White House, Bush has also taken up oil painting.George W. Bush Talks About Life After the White House at Memphis Hospital Celebration. The Daily Beast July 17, 2012. Retrieved July 15, 2013. Military career Lt. George W. Bush while in the Texas Air National Guard In May 1968, Bush was commissioned into the Texas Air National Guard. After two years of activeduty service while training, he was assigned to Houston, flying Convair F102s with the 147th Reconnaissance Wing out of the Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base. Critics, including former Democratic National Committee Chairman Terry McAuliffe, have alleged that Bush was favorably treated due to his fathers political standing as a member of the House of Representatives, citing his selection as a pilot despite his low pilot aptitude test scores and his irregular attendance. In June 2005, the United States Department of Defense released all the records of Bushs Texas Air National Guard service, which remain in its official archives. In late 1972 and early 1973, he drilled with the 187th Fighter Wing of the Alabama Air National Guard. He had moved to Montgomery, Alabama, to work on the unsuccessful U.S. Senate campaign of Republican Winton M. Blount. In 1972, Bush was suspended from flying for failure to take a scheduled physical exam.Rutenberg, Jim . He was honorably discharged from the Air Force Reserve on November 21, 1974. Business career In 1977, Bush established Arbusto Energy, a small oil exploration company, although it did not begin operations until the following year. He later changed the name to Bush Exploration. In 1984, his company merged with the larger Spectrum 7, and Bush became chairman. The company was hurt by decreased oil prices, and it folded into HKN, Inc., with Bush becoming a member of HKNs board of directors. Questions of possible insider trading involving HKN arose, but a Securities and Exchange Commission investigation concluded that the information Bush had at the time of his stock sale was not sufficient to constitute insider trading. In April 1989, Bush arranged for a group of investors to purchase a controlling interest in the Texas Rangers baseball franchise for 89M and invested 500K himself to start. He then served as managing general partner for five years. He actively led the teams projects and regularly attended its games, often choosing to sit in the open stands with fans. Bushs sale of his shares in the Rangers in 1998 brought him over 15million from his initial 800,000 investment. Early political involvement George W. Bush with his father outside the White House, April 29, 1992 In 1978, Bush ran for the House of Representatives from Texass 19th congressional district. The retiring member, George H. Mahon, had held the district for the Democratic Party since 1935. Bushs opponent, Kent Hance, portrayed him as out of touch with rural Texans, and Bush lost the election with 46.8 percent of the vote to Hances 53.2 percent. Bush and his family moved to Washington, D.C., in 1988 to work on his fathers campaign for the U.S. presidency. He served as a campaign advisor and liaison to the media, and assisted his father by campaigning across the country. In December 1991, Bush was one of seven people named by his father to run his fathers 1992 presidential reelection campaign, as a campaign advisor. The previous month, his father had asked him to tell White House chief of staff John H. Sununu that he should resign. Governor of Texas Governor Bush with father, former president George H. W. Bush and wife, Laura, in 1997 Bush declared his candidacy for the 1994 Texas gubernatorial election at the same time that his brother Jeb sought the governorship of Florida. His campaign focused on four themes welfare reform, tort reform, crime reduction, and education improvement. Bushs campaign advisers were Karen Hughes, Joe Allbaugh, and Karl Rove. After easily winning the Republican primary, Bush faced popular Democratic incumbent Governor Ann Richards. In the course of the campaign, Bush pledged to sign a bill allowing Texans to obtain permits to carry concealed weapons. Richards had vetoed the bill, but Bush signed it into law after he became governor. According to The Atlantic Monthly , the race featured a rumor that she was a lesbian, along with a rare instance of such a tactics making it into the public record when a regional chairman of the Bush campaign allowed himself, perhaps inadvertently, to be quoted criticizing Richards for appointing avowed homosexual activists to state jobs. The Atlantic , and others, connected the lesbian rumor to Karl Rove, but Rove denied being involved. Bush won the general election with 53.5percent against Richards 45.9percent. Bush used a budget surplus to push through Texass largest taxcut, 2 billion. He extended government funding for organizations providing education of the dangers of alcohol and drug use and abuse, and helping to reduce domestic violence. Critics contended that during his tenure, Texas ranked near the bottom in environmental evaluations. Supporters pointed to his efforts to raise the salaries of teachers and improve educational test scores. In 1999, Bush signed a law that required electric retailers to buy a certain amount of energy from renewable sources ,SB7 Law text Texas Legislature Online , May 1999. Retrieved September 24, 2011. which helped Texas eventually become the leading producer of wind powered electricity in the U.S.Koronowski, Ryan. Its Not Just Oil Wind Power Approaches 8 of Texas Electricity in 2010 Repower America, January 19, 2011. Retrieved September 24, 2011. In 1998, Bush won reelection with a record 69percent of the vote. He became the first governor in Texas history to be elected to two consecutive fouryear terms. For most of Texas history, governors served twoyear terms a constitutional amendment extended those terms to four years starting in 1975. In his second term, Bush promoted faithbased organizations and enjoyed high approval ratings. He proclaimed June 10, 2000, to be Jesus Day in Texas, a day on which he urged all Texans to answer the call to serve those in need. Throughout Bushs first term, national attention focused on him as a potential future presidential candidate. Following his reelection, speculation soared. Within a year, he decided to seek the 2000 Republican presidential nomination. Presidential campaigns 2000 presidential candidacy Primary George W. Bush in Concord, New Hampshire, signing to be a candidate for president Lame duck incumbent president Bill Clinton was a Democrat, and the field for nomination for President of both parties was wide open. Bush was governor of Texas in June 1999 when he announced his candidacy for President of the United States. He entered a large field of hopefuls for the Republican Party presidential nomination that included John McCain, Alan Keyes, Steve Forbes, Gary Bauer, Orrin Hatch, Elizabeth Dole, Dan Quayle, Pat Buchanan, Lamar Alexander, John Kasich, and Bob Smith. Bush portrayed himself as a compassionate conservative, implying he was more centrist than other Republicans. He campaigned on a platform that included bringing integrity and honor back to the White House, increasing the size of the United States Armed Forces, cutting taxes, improving education, and aiding minorities. By early 2000, the race had centered on Bush and McCain. Bush won the Iowa caucuses, and although he was heavily favored to win the New Hampshire primary, he trailed McCain by 19percent and lost that primary. Despite this, Bush regained momentum, and according to political observers, he effectively became the front runner after the South Carolina primary which according to The Boston Globe made history for his campaigns negativity. The New York Times described it as a smear campaign. General election 2000 electoral vote results On July 25, 2000, Bush surprised some observers when he selected Dick Cheney a former White House Chief of Staff, U.S. Representative, and Secretary of Defense to be his running mate. At the time, Cheney was serving as head of Bushs VicePresidential search committee. Soon after at the 2000 Republican National Convention, Bush and Cheney were officially nominated by the Republican Party. Bush continued to campaign across the country and touted his record as governor of Texas. During his campaign, Bush criticized his Democratic opponent, incumbent Vice President Al Gore, over gun control and taxation. When the election returns were tallied on November 7, Bush had won 29 states, including Florida. The closeness of the Florida outcome led to a recount. The initial recount also went to Bush, but the outcome was tied up in lower courts for a month until eventually reaching the U.S. Supreme Court.George W. Bush, et al., Petitioners v. Albert Gore, Jr., et al., 531 U.S. 98 . Retrieved February 12, 2010. On December 9, in the controversial Bush v. Gore ruling, the Court reversed a Florida Supreme Court decision that had ordered a third count, and stopped an ordered statewide hand recount based on the argument that the use of different standards among Floridas counties violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The machine recount showed that Bush had won the Florida vote by a margin of 537 votes out of six million cast. Although he had received 543,895 fewer individual nationwide votes than Gore, Bush won the election, receiving 271 electoral votes to Gores 266 . Bush was the first person to win an American presidential election with fewer popular votes than another candidate since Benjamin Harrison in 1888. 2004 presidential candidacy George W. Bush speaks at a campaign rally in 2004 2004 electoral vote results In his 2004 bid for reelection, Bush commanded broad support in the Republican Party and did not encounter a primary challenge. He appointed Ken Mehlman as campaign manager, and Karl Rove devised a political strategy . Bush and the Republican platform emphasized a strong commitment to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, support for the USA PATRIOT Act, a renewed shift in policy for constitutional amendments banning abortion and samesex marriage,After initial comments made in March, there was no statement on the latter issue until June. reforming Social Security to create private investment accounts, creation of an ownership society, and opposing mandatory carbon emissions controls. Bush also called for the implementation of a guest worker program for immigrants, which was criticized by conservatives. The Bush campaign advertised across the U.S. against Democratic candidates, including Bushs emerging opponent, Massachusetts Senator John Kerry. Kerry and other Democrats attacked Bush on the Iraq War, and accused him of failing to stimulate the economy and job growth. The Bush campaign portrayed Kerry as a staunch liberal who would raise taxes and increase the size of government. The Bush campaign continuously criticized Kerrys seemingly contradictory statements on the war in Iraq, and argued that Kerry lacked the decisiveness and vision necessary for success in the War on Terror. In the election, Bush carried 31 of 50 states, receiving a total of 286 electoral votes. He won an absolute majority of the popular vote . Bushs father George H.W. Bush was the previous president who won an absolute majority of the popular vote he accomplished that feat in the 1988 election. Additionally, it was the first time since Herbert Hoovers election in 1928 that a Republican president was elected alongside reelected Republican majorities in both Houses of Congress. Presidency President Bush addressing the media at the Pentagon, September 17, 2001 Bush had originally outlined an ambitious domestic agenda, but his priorities were significantly altered following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Wars were waged in Afghanistan and Iraq, and there were significant domestic debates regarding immigration, healthcare, Social Security, economic policy, and treatment of terrorist detainees. Over an eightyear period, Bushs oncehigh approval ratings steadily declined, while his disapproval numbers increased significantly. In 2007, the United States entered the longest postWorld War II recession. Domestic policy Economic policy Bush took office during a period of economic recession in the wake of the bursting of the dotcom bubble.Origins of the Crash The Great Bubble and Its Undoing, Roger Lowenstein, Penguin Books, 2004, , page 114115 The terrorist attacks also impacted the economy. His administration increased federal government spending from 1.789 trillion to 2.983 trillion while revenues increased from 2.025 trillion to 2.524 trillion . Individual income tax revenues increased by 14percent, corporate tax revenues by 50percent, customs and duties by 40percent. Discretionary defense spending was increased by 107percent, discretionary domestic spending by 62percent, Medicare spending by 131percent, social security by 51percent, and income security spending by 130percent. Cyclically adjusted, revenues rose by 35percent and spending by 65percent.Historical Budget Data, Congressional Budget Office, Tables F1, F3, F7, F9, and F12. President Bush signing a 1.35 trillion tax cut into law, June 7, 2001 The increase in spending was more than under any predecessor since Lyndon B. Johnson.Spending Under President George W. Bush, Veronique de Rugy, Mercatus Center, George Mason University, Mar 2009, Table 2 The number of economic regulation governmental workers increased by 91,196. The surplus in fiscal year 2000 was 237 billion the third consecutive surplus and the largest surplus ever.Office of Management and Budget National Economic Council, September 27, 2000 In 2001, Bushs budget estimated that there would be a 5.6trillion surplus over the next ten years.A BLUEPRINT FOR NEW BEGINNINGS A RESPONSIBLE BUDGET FOR AMERICA S PRIORITIES, U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, WASHINGTON 2001, page 7 Facing congressional opposition, Bush held townhall style meetings across the U.S. in order to increase public support for his plan for a 1.35trillion tax cut program one of the largest tax cuts in U.S. history. Bush argued that unspent government funds should be returned to taxpayers, saying the surplus is not the governments money. The surplus is the peoples money. Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan warned of a recession and Bush stated that a tax cut would stimulate the economy and create jobs. Treasury Secretary Paul H. ONeill, opposed some of the tax cuts on the basis that they would contribute to budget deficits and undermine Social Security. ONeill disputes the claim, made in Bushs book Decision Points , that he never openly disagreed with him on planned tax cuts. By 2003, the economy showed signs of improvement, though job growth remained stagnant. Another tax cut program was passed that year. During the 2001 to 2008 years, GDP grew at an average annual rate of 2.125percent, less than for past business cycles. Bush entered office with the Dow Jones Industrial Average at 10,587, and the average peaked in October 2007 at over 14,000. When Bush left office, the average was at 7,949, one of the lowest levels of his presidency. Deficit and debt increases 2001 2009. Gross debt has increased over 500 billion each year since FY2003. Unemployment originally rose from 4.2percent in January 2001 to 6.3percent in June 2003, but subsequently dropped to 4.5percent as of July 2007. Adjusted for inflation, median household income dropped by 1,175 between 2000 and 2007, while Professor Ken Homa of Georgetown University has noted that Median real aftertax household income went up 2 percent. The poverty rate increased from 11.3percent in 2000 to 12.3percent in 2006 after peaking at 12.7percent in 2004. By October 2008, due to increases in spending,Greenburg, Jan Crawford. Supreme Conflict The Inside Story of the Struggle for Control of the United States Supreme Court, 2007, Penguin Books, p. 273 the national debt had risen to 11.3trillion,Debt nation, post two, Small Business Services CPA Group, Inc. an increase of over 100percent from 2000 when the debt was only 5.6trillion. Most debt was accumulated as a result of what became known as the Bush tax cuts and increased national security spending. In March 2006, thenSenator Barack Obama said when he voted against raising the debt ceiling The fact that we are here today to debate raising Americas debt limit is a sign of leadership failure. By the end of Bushs presidency, unemployment climbed to 7.2percent. In December 2007, the United States entered the longest post World War II recession, which included a housing market correction, a subprime mortgage crisis, soaring oil prices, and a declining dollar value. In February, 63,000 jobs were lost, a fiveyear record.Aversa, Jeannine, Employers Slash 63,000 Jobs in February, Most in 5 Years, Feeding Recession Fears, Associated Press, March 7, 2008. Retrieved July 11, 2008. To aid with the situation, Bush signed a 170billion economic stimulus package which was intended to improve the economic situation by sending tax rebate checks to many Americans and providing tax breaks for struggling businesses. The Bush administration pushed for significantly increased regulation of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in 2003, and after two years, the regulations passed the House but died in the Senate. Many Republican senators, as well as influential members of the Bush Administration, feared that the agency created by these regulations would merely be mimicking the private sectors risky practices. In September 2008, the crisis became much more serious beginning with the government takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac followed by the collapse of Lehman Brothers and a federal bailout of American International Group for 85billion.See American International Group for details and citations. Many economists and world governments determined that the situation became the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. Additional regulation over the housing market would have been beneficial, according to former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan. Bush, meanwhile, proposed a financial rescue plan to buy back a large portion of the U.S. mortgage market. Vince Reinhardt, a former Federal Reserve economist now at the American Enterprise Institute, said it would have helped for the Bush administration to empower the folks at Treasury and the Federal Reserve and the comptroller of the currency and the FDIC to look at these issues more closely, and additionally, that it would have helped for Congress to have held hearings. In November 2008, over 500,000 jobs were lost, which marked the largest loss of jobs in the United States in 34 years. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that in the last four months of 2008, 1.9million jobs were lost. By the end of 2008, the U.S. had lost a total of 2.6million jobs. Education and health Bush undertook a number of educational agendas, such as increasing the funding for the National Science Foundation and National Institutes of Health in his first years of office, and creating education programs to strengthen the grounding in science and mathematics for American high school students. Funding for the NIH was cut in 2006, the first such cut in 36 years, due to rising inflation. President Bush signing the No Child Left Behind Act into law, January 8, 2002 One of the administrations early major initiatives was the No Child Left Behind Act, which aimed to measure and close the gap between rich and poor student performance, provide options to parents with students in lowperforming schools, and target more federal funding to lowincome schools. This landmark education initiative passed with broad bipartisan support, including that of Senator Ted Kennedy of Massachusetts. It was signed into law by Bush in early 2002. Many contend that the initiative has been successful, as cited by the fact that students in the U.S. have performed significantly better on state reading and math tests since Bush signed No Child Left Behind into law. Critics argue that it is underfunded and that NCLBAs focus on highstakes testing and quantitative outcomes is counterproductive. After being reelected, Bush signed into law a Medicare drug benefit program that, according to Jan Crawford, resulted in the greatest expansion in Americas welfare state in forty years the bills costs approached 7trillion.Greenburg, Jan Crawford, Supreme Conflict The Inside Story of the Struggle for Control of the United States Supreme Court, 2007, Penguin Books, p. 274 In 2007, Bush opposed and vetoed State Childrens Health Insurance Program legislation, which was added by the Democrats onto a war funding bill and passed by Congress. The SCHIP legislation would have significantly expanded federally funded health care benefits and plans to children of some lowincome families from about sixmillion to tenmillion children. It was to be funded by an increase in the cigarette tax. Bush viewed the legislation as a move toward socialized health care, and asserted that the program could benefit families making as much as 83,000 per year who did not need the help. Social services and Social Security Following Republican efforts to pass the Medicare Act of 2003, Bush signed the bill, which included major changes to the Medicare program by providing beneficiaries with some assistance in paying for prescription drugs, while relying on private insurance for the delivery of benefits. The retired persons lobby group AARP worked with the Bush Administration on the program and gave their endorsement. Bush said the law, estimated to cost 400billion over the first ten years, would give the elderly better choices and more control over their health care. President Bush discussing Social Security reform at the Lake Nona YMCA Family Center in Orlando, Florida, March 18, 2005 Bush began his second term by outlining a major initiative to reform Social Security, which was facing record deficit projections beginning in 2005. Bush made it the centerpiece of his domestic agenda despite opposition from some in the U.S. Congress. In his 2005 State of the Union Address, Bush discussed the potential impending bankruptcy of the program and outlined his new program, which included partial privatization of the system, personal Social Security accounts, and options to permit Americans to divert a portion of their Social Security tax into secured investments. Democrats opposed the proposal to partially privatize the system. Bush embarked on a 60day national tour, campaigning for his initiative in media events known as Conversations on Social Security, in an attempt to gain public support. Nevertheless, public support for the proposal declined and the House Republican leadership decided not to put Social Security reform on the priority list for the remainder of their 2005 legislative agenda. The proposals legislative prospects were further diminished by the fall of 2005 political fallout from Hurricane Katrina. After the Democrats gained control of both houses of Congress as a result of the 2006 midterm elections, there was no prospect of further congressional action on the Bush proposal for the remainder of his term in office. Environmental policies Upon taking office in 2001, Bush stated his opposition to the Kyoto Protocol, an amendment to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change which seeks to impose mandatory targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, citing that the treaty exempted 80percent of the worlds population and would have cost tens of billions of dollars per year. He also cited that the Senate had voted 95 0 in 1997 on a resolution expressing its disapproval of the protocol. In May 2001, Bush signed an executive order to create an interagency task force to streamline energy projects,Bush, George W. Executive Order 13212 Actions To Expedite EnergyRelated Projects United States Department of Energy , May 18, 2001. Amendment. Retrieved September 24, 2011. and later signed two other executive orders to tackle environmental issues. In 2002, Bush announced the Clear Skies Act of 2003, aimed at amending the Clean Air Act to reduce air pollution through the use of emissions trading programs. Many experts argued that this legislation would have weakened the original legislation by allowing higher emission rates of pollutants than were previously legal. The initiative was introduced to Congress, but failed to make it out of committee. Later in 2006, Bush declared the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands a national monument, creating the largest marine reserve to date. The Papahnaumokukea Marine National Monument comprises 84million acres and is home to 7,000 species of fish, birds, and other marine animals, many of which are specific to only those islands. The move was hailed by conservationists for its foresight and leadership in protecting this incredible area. Bush has said that he believes that global warming is real and has noted that it is a serious problem, but he asserted there is a debate over whether its manmade or naturally caused. The Bush Administrations stance on global warming remained controversial in the scientific and environmental communities. Critics have alleged that the administration misinformed the public and did not do enough to reduce carbon emissions and deter global warming. Romm calls Bushs dont rush to judgment and we need to ask more questions stance a classic delay tactic. Part 2. Energy policies In his 2006 State of the Union Address, Bush declared, America is addicted to oil and announced his Advanced Energy Initiative to increase energy development research. President Bush delivering a statement on energy, urging Congress to end offshore oil drill ban, June 18, 2008 In his 2007 State of the Union Address, Bush renewed his pledge to work toward diminished reliance on foreign oil by reducing fossil fuel consumption and increasing alternative fuel production. Amid high gasoline prices in 2008, Bush lifted a ban on offshore drilling. However, the move was largely symbolic because there was still a federal law banning offshore drilling. Bush said, This means that the only thing standing between the American people and these vast oil reserves is action from the U.S. Congress. Bush had said in June 2008, In the long run, the solution is to reduce demand for oil by promoting alternative energy technologies. My administration has worked with Congress to invest in gassaving technologies like advanced batteries and hydrogen fuel cells... In the short run, the American economy will continue to rely largely on oil. And that means we need to increase supply, especially here at home. So my administration has repeatedly called on Congress to expand domestic oil production. In his 2008 State of the Union Address, Bush announced that the U.S. would commit 2billion over the next three years to a new international fund to promote clean energy technologies and fight climate change, saying, Along with contributions from other countries, this fund will increase and accelerate the deployment of all forms of cleaner, more efficient technologies in developing nations like India and China, and help leverage substantial privatesector capital by making clean energy projects more financially attractive. He also announced plans to reaffirm the United States commitment to work with major economies, and, through the UN, to complete an international agreement that will slow, stop, and eventually reverse the growth of greenhouse gases he stated, This agreement will be effective only if it includes commitments by every major economy and gives none a free ride. Stem cell research and first veto Federal funding for medical research involving the creation or destruction of human embryos through the Department of Health and Human Services and the National Institutes of Health has been forbidden by law since the passage in 1995 of the DickeyWicker Amendment by Congress and the signature of President Bill Clinton. Bush has said that he supports adult stem cell research and has supported federal legislation that finances adult stem cell research. However, Bush did not support embryonic stem cell research. On August 9, 2001, Bush signed an executive order lifting the ban on federal funding for the 71 existing lines of stem cells, but the ability of these existing lines to provide an adequate medium for testing has been questioned. Testing can be done on only 12 of the original lines, and all approved lines have been cultured in contact with mouse cells, which creates safety issues that complicate development and approval of therapies from these lines. On July 19, 2006, Bush used his veto power for the first time in his presidency to veto the Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act. The bill would have repealed the DickeyWicker Amendment, thereby permitting federal money to be used for research where stem cells are derived from the destruction of an embryo. Genetic Nondiscrimination On May 21, 2008 President George W. Bush signed into law the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act . The bill aims to protect Americans against discrimination based on their genetic information when it comes to health insurance and employment. The issue had been debated for 13 years before becoming law. It is designed to protect citizens while not hindering genetic research. Immigration President Bush discussing border security with Homeland Security Director Michael Chertoff near El Paso, November 2005 Nearly 8million immigrants came to the United States from 2000 to 2005, more than in any other fiveyear period in the nations history. Almost half entered illegally. In 2006, Bush urged Congress to allow more than 12million illegal immigrants to work in the United States with the creation of a temporary guestworker program. Bush also urged Congress to provide additional funds for border security and committed to deploying 6,000 National Guard troops to the Mexico United States border. From May to June 2007, Bush strongly supported the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2007, which was written by a bipartisan group of Senators with the active participation of the Bush administration. The bill envisioned a legalization program for illegal immigrants, with an eventual path to citizenship establishing a guest worker program a series of border and work site enforcement measures a reform of the green card application process and the introduction of a pointbased merit system for green cards elimination of chain migration and of the Diversity Immigrant Visa and other measures. Bush argued that the lack of legal status denies the protections of U.S. laws to millions of people who face dangers of poverty and exploitation, and penalizes employers despite a demand for immigrant labor. Bush contended that the proposed bill did not amount to amnesty. A heated public debate followed, which resulted in a substantial rift within the Republican Party, most conservatives opposed it because of its legalization or amnesty provisions. The bill was eventually defeated in the Senate on June 28, 2007, when a cloture motion failed on a 46 53 vote. Bush expressed disappointment upon the defeat of one of his signature domestic initiatives. The Bush administration later proposed a series of immigration enforcement measures that do not require a change in law. On September 19, 2010, former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert said that Bush offered to accept 100,000 Palestinian refugees as American citizens if a permanent settlement had been reached between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. Hurricane Katrina President Bush shaking hands with New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin after viewing the devastation of Hurricane Katrina, September 2, 2005 Hurricane Katrina, one of the most damaging natural disasters in U.S. history, struck early in Bushs second term. Katrina formed in late August during the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season and devastated much of the northcentral Gulf Coast of the United States, particularly New Orleans. Bush declared a state of emergency in Louisiana on August 27, and in Mississippi and Alabama the following day he authorized the Department of Homeland Security and Federal Emergency Management Agency to manage the disaster, but his announcement failed to spur these agencies to action. The eye of the hurricane made landfall on August 29, and New Orleans began to flood due to levee breaches later that day, Bush declared that a major disaster existed in Louisiana, officially authorizing FEMA to start using federal funds to assist in the recovery effort. President Bush with hurricane victims in Biloxi, September 2, 2005 On August 30, DHS Secretary Michael Chertoff declared it an incident of national significance, triggering the first use of the newly created National Response Plan. Three days later, on September 2, National Guard troops first entered the city of New Orleans. The same day, Bush toured parts of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama and declared that the success of the recovery effort up to that point was not enough. As the disaster in New Orleans intensified, critics charged that Bush was misrepresenting his administrations role in what they saw as a flawed response. Leaders attacked Bush for having appointed apparently incompetent leaders to positions of power at FEMA, notably Michael D. Brown it was also argued that the federal response was limited as a result of the Iraq War and Bush himself did not act upon warnings of floods.I dont think anybody anticipated the breach of the levees. George W. Bush to Diane Sawyer, Good Morning America , September 1, 2005. Bush responded to mounting criticism by accepting full responsibility for the federal governments failures in its handling of the emergency. It has been argued that with Katrina, Bush passed a political tipping point from which he would not recover. Midterm dismissal of U.S. attorneys President Bush announcing his nomination of Alberto Gonzales as the next U.S. Attorney General, November 10, 2004 During Bushs second term, a controversy arose over the Justice Departments midterm dismissal of seven United States Attorneys. The White House maintained that the U.S. attorneys were fired for poor performance. Attorney General Alberto Gonzales later resigned over the issue, along with other senior members of the Justice Department. The House Judiciary Committee issued subpoenas for advisers Harriet Miers and Josh Bolten to testify regarding this matter, but Bush directed Miers and Bolten to not comply with those subpoenas, invoking his right of executive privilege. Bush maintained that all of his advisers were protected under a broad executive privilege protection to receive candid advice. The Justice Department determined that the Presidents order was legal. Although Congressional investigations focused on whether the Justice Department and the White House were using the U.S. Attorney positions for political advantage, no official findings have been released. On March 10, 2008, the Congress filed a federal lawsuit to enforce their issued subpoenas. On July 31, 2008, a United States district court judge ruled that Bushs top advisers were not immune from Congressional subpoenas. In all, twelve Justice Department officials resigned rather than testify under oath before Congress. They included Attorney General Alberto Gonzales and his chief of staff Kyle Sampson, Gonzales liaison to the White House Monica Goodling, aide to the president Karl Rove and his senior aide Sara Taylor. In addition, legal counsel to the president Harriet Miers and deputy chief of staff to the president Joshua Bolten were both found in contempt of Congress. In 2010, the Justice Department investigator concluded that though political considerations did play a part in as many as four of the attorney firings, the firings were inappropriately political, but not criminal. According to the prosecutors, there was insufficient evidence to pursue prosecution for any criminal offense. Purge of the Central Intelligence Agency Following the resignation of CIA director George Tenet in 2004, Bush nominated Porter Goss to head the agency. The White House ordered Goss to purge agency officers who were disloyal to the administration. After Goss appointment, many of the CIAs senior agents were fired or quit. The CIA has been accused of deliberately leaking classified information to undermine the 2004 election. Foreign policy President Bush with Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi in 2005 Countries visited by President George W. Bush during his time in office In July 2001, Bush visited Pope John Paul II at Castel Gandolfo.Decision Points Bush, George W. Random House 2010 page 116 During his Presidential campaign, Bushs foreign policy platform included support for stronger economic and political relationship with Latin America, especially Mexico, and a reduction of involvement in nationbuilding and other smallscale military engagements. The administration pursued a national missile defense. Bush was an advocate of Chinas entry into the World Trade Organization. In his 2002 State of the Union Address, Bush referred to an axis of evil including Iraq, Iran and North Korea. After the September 11 attacks on New York, Bush launched the War on Terror, in which the United States military and a small international coalition invaded Afghanistan. In 2003, Bush then launched the invasion of Iraq, searching for Weapons of Mass Destruction, which he described as being part of the War on Terrorism. Those invasions led to the toppling of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and the removal of Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. Foreign Minister of India Pranab Mukherjee with President Bush, March 2008 Bush began his second term with an emphasis on improving strained relations with European nations. He appointed longtime adviser Karen Hughes to oversee a global public relations campaign. Bush lauded the prodemocracy struggles in Georgia and Ukraine. In March 2006, a visit to India led to renewed ties between the two countries, reversing decades of U.S. policy. The visit focused particularly on areas of nuclear energy and counterterrorism cooperation, discussions that would lead eventually to the India United States Civil Nuclear Agreement. This is in stark contrast to the stance taken by his predecessor, Clinton, whose approach and response to India after the 1998 nuclear tests was that of sanctions and hectoring. The relationship between India and the United States was one that dramatically improved during Bushs tenure. Midway through Bushs second term, it was questioned whether Bush was retreating from his freedom and democracy agenda, highlighted in policy changes toward some oilrich former Soviet republics in central Asia. In an address before both Houses of Congress on September 20, 2001, Bush thanked the nations of the world for their support following the September 11 attacks. He specifically thanked UK Prime Minister Tony Blair for traveling to Washington to show unity of purpose with America, and said America has no truer friend than Great Britain. September 11 attacks President Bush, standing with firefighter Bob Beckwith, addressing rescue workers at Ground Zero in New York, September 14, 2001 The September 11 terrorist attacks were a major turning point in Bushs presidency. That evening, he addressed the nation from the Oval Office, promising a strong response to the attacks. He also emphasized the need for the nation to come together and comfort the families of the victims. On September 14, he visited Ground Zero, meeting with Mayor Rudy Giuliani, firefighters, police officers, and volunteers. Bush addressed the gathering via a megaphone while standing on a heap of rubble, to much applause I can hear you. The rest of the world hears you. And the people who knocked these buildings down will hear all of us soon. In a September 20 speech, Bush condemned Osama bin Laden and his organization AlQaeda, and issued an ultimatum to the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, where bin Laden was operating, to hand over the terrorists, or ... share in their fate. War on Terrorism President Bush presenting former British Prime Minister Tony Blair with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, January 13, 2009 After September 11, Bush announced a global War on Terror. The Afghan Taliban regime was not forthcoming with Osama bin Laden, so Bush ordered the invasion of Afghanistan to overthrow the Taliban regime. In his January 29, 2002 State of the Union Address, he asserted that an axis of evil consisting of North Korea, Iran, and Iraq was arming to threaten the peace of the world and posed a grave and growing danger. The Bush Administration asserted both a right and the intention to wage preemptive war, or preventive war. This became the basis for the Bush Doctrine which weakened the unprecedented levels of international and domestic support for the United States which had followed the September 11 attacks. Dissent and criticism of Bushs leadership in the War on Terror increased as the war in Iraq continued.Lopez, George, Perils of Bushs Preemptive War Doctrine, The Indianapolis Star , October 3, 2003. In 2006, a National Intelligence Estimate concluded that the Iraq War had become the cause clbre for jihadists. Afghanistan invasion President Bush and President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan appearing at a joint news conference in Kabul, March 1, 2006 On October 7, 2001, U.S. and British forces initiated bombing campaigns that led to the arrival of Northern Alliance troops in Kabul on November 13. The main goals of the war were to defeat the Taliban, drive alQaeda out of Afghanistan, and capture key alQaeda leaders. In December 2001, the Pentagon reported that the Taliban had been defeated, but cautioned that the war would go on to continue weakening Taliban and alQaeda leaders. Later that month the UN had installed the Afghan Transitional Administration chaired by Hamid Karzai. In 2002, based on UNICEF figures, Nicholas Kristof reported that our invasion of Afghanistan may end up saving one million lives over the next decade as the result of improved healthcare and greater access to humanitarian aid.Kristof, Nicholas D., A Merciful War, The New York Times , February 1, 2002. Now aid is pouring in and lives are being saved on an enormous scale. Unicef, for example, has vaccinated 734,000 children against measles over the last two months, in a country where virtually no one had been vaccinated against the disease in the previous 10 years. Because measles often led to death in Afghanistan, the vaccination campaign will save at least 35,000 childrens lives each year... Heidi J. Larson of Unicef says that if all goes well, child and maternal mortality rates will drop in half in Afghanistan over the next five years. That would mean 112,000 fewer children and 7,500 fewer pregnant women dying each year. Efforts to kill or capture alQaeda leader Osama bin Laden failed as he escaped a battle in December 2001 in the mountainous region of Tora Bora, which the Bush Administration later acknowledged to have resulted from a failure to commit enough U.S. ground troops. It was not until May 2011, two years after Bush left office, that bin Laden was killed by U.S. forces under the Obama administration. Bin Ladens successor, Ayman alZawahiri, remains at large. Despite the initial success in driving the Taliban from power in Kabul, by early 2003 the Taliban was regrouping, amassing new funds and recruits. The 2005 failure of Operation Red Wings showed that the Taliban had returned. In 2006, the Taliban insurgency appeared larger, fiercer and better organized than expected, with largescale allied offensives such as Operation Mountain Thrust attaining limited success. As a result, Bush commissioned 3,500 additional troops to the country in March 2007. Iraq invasion President Bush, with Naval Flight Officer Lieutenant Ryan Philips, after landing on the USS Abraham Lincoln prior to his Mission Accomplished speech, May 1, 2003 Beginning with his January 29, 2002 State of the Union address, Bush began publicly focusing attention on Iraq, which he labeled as part of an axis of evil allied with terrorists and posing a grave and growing danger to U.S. interests through possession of weapons of mass destruction. In the latter half of 2002, CIA reports contained assertions of Saddam Husseins intent of reconstituting nuclear weapons programs, not properly accounting for Iraqi biological and chemical weapons, and that some Iraqi missiles had a range greater than allowed by the UN sanctions. Contentions that the Bush Administration manipulated or exaggerated the threat and evidence of Iraqs weapons of mass destruction capabilities would eventually become a major point of criticism for the president.Judis, John B. and Ackerman, Spencer, The Selling of the Iraq War, The New Republic , June 2003.Hersh, Seymour M., The Stovepipe, The New Yorker , October 27, 2003. In late 2002 and early 2003, Bush urged the United Nations to enforce Iraqi disarmament mandates, precipitating a diplomatic crisis. In November 2002, Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei led UN weapons inspectors in Iraq, but were advised by the U.S. to depart the country four days prior to the U.S. invasion, despite their requests for more time to complete their tasks. The U.S. initially sought a UN Security Council resolution authorizing the use of military force but dropped the bid for UN approval due to vigorous opposition from several countries. President Bush paying a surprise visit to Baghdad International Airport, November 27, 2003 More than 20 nations , designated the coalition of the willing joined the United States in invading Iraq. They launched the invasion on March 20, 2003. The Iraqi military was quickly defeated. The capital, Baghdad, fell on April 9, 2003. On May 1, Bush declared the end of major combat operations in Iraq. The initial success of U.S. operations increased his popularity, but the U.S. and allied forces faced a growing insurgency led by sectarian groups Bushs Mission Accomplished speech was later criticized as premature. From 2004 until 2007, the situation in Iraq deteriorated further, with some observers arguing that there was a fullscale civil war in Iraq. Bushs policies met with criticism, including demands domestically to set a timetable to withdraw troops from Iraq. The 2006 report of the bipartisan Iraq Study Group, led by James Baker, concluded that the situation in Iraq was grave and deteriorating. While Bush admitted that there were strategic mistakes made in regards to the stability of Iraq, he maintained he would not change the overall Iraq strategy. According to Iraq Body Count, some 251,000 Iraqis have been killed in the civil war following the U.S.led invasion, including at least 163,841 civilians. President Bush with Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri alMaliki, July 25, 2006 In January 2005, free, democratic elections were held in Iraq for the first time in 50 years. According to Iraqi National Security Advisor Mowaffak alRubaie, This is the greatest day in the history of this country. Bush praised the event as well, saying that the Iraqis have taken rightful control of their countrys destiny. This led to the election of Jalal Talabani as President and Nouri alMaliki as Prime Minister of Iraq. A referendum to approve a constitution in Iraq was held in October 2005, supported by most Shiites and many Kurds. On January 10, 2007, Bush announced a surge of 21,500 more troops for Iraq, as well as a job program for Iraqis, more reconstruction proposals, and 1.2billion for these programs. On May 1, 2007, Bush used his secondever veto to reject a bill setting a deadline for the withdrawal of U.S. troops, saying the debate over the conflict was understandable but insisting that a continued U.S. presence there was crucial. In March 2008, Bush praised the Iraqi governments bold decision to launch the Battle of Basra against the Mahdi Army, calling it a defining moment in the history of a free Iraq. He said he would carefully weigh recommendations from his commanding General David Petraeus and Ambassador Ryan Crocker about how to proceed after the end of the military buildup in the summer of 2008. He also praised the Iraqis legislative achievements, including a pension law, a revised deBaathification law, a new budget, an amnesty law, and a provincial powers measure that, he said, set the stage for the Iraqi elections. By July 2008, American troop deaths had reached their lowest number since the war began, and due to increased stability in Iraq, Bush announced the withdrawal of additional American forces. Surveillance Following the events of September 11, Bush issued an executive order authorizing the Presidents Surveillance Program which included allowing the NSA to monitor communications between suspected terrorists outside the U.S and parties within the U.S. without obtaining a warrant as required by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. As of 2009, the other provisions of the program remained highly classified. Once the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel questioned its original legal opinion that FISA did not apply in a time of war, the program was subsequently reauthorized by the President on the basis that the warrant requirements of FISA were implicitly superseded by the subsequent passage of the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists.U.S. Department of Justice White Paper on NSA Legal Authorities. The program proved to be controversial, as critics of the administration, as well as organizations such as the American Bar Association, argued that it was illegal. In August 2006, a U.S. district court judge ruled that the NSA electronic surveillance program was unconstitutional, but on July 6, 2007, that ruling was vacated by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit on the grounds that the plaintiffs lacked standing. On January 17, 2007, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales informed U.S. Senate leaders that the program would not be reauthorized by the President, but would be subjected to judicial oversight.sAG letter to Senate leaders regarding FISC decision and conclusion of Terrorist Surveillance Program Later in 2007, the NSA launched a replacement for the program, referred to as PRISM, that was subject to the oversight of the United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court. This program was not publicly revealed until reports by The Washington Post and The Guardian emerged in June 2013. Interrogation policies President Bush at the celebration of the sixtieth anniversary of victory in World War II, Red Square, Moscow Bush authorized the CIA to use waterboarding and several other enhanced interrogation techniques that several critics, including Barack Obama, would label as torture. Between 2002 and 2003 the CIA considered certain enhanced interrogation techniques, such as waterboarding, to be legal based on a secret Justice Department legal opinion arguing that terror detainees were not protected by the Geneva Conventions ban on torture and Vice President Cheney said enhanced interrogation including waterboarding was not torture or illegal. The CIA had exercised the technique on certain key terrorist suspects under authority given to it in the Bybee Memo from the Attorney General, though that memo was later withdrawn. While not permitted by the U.S. Army Field Manuals which assert that harsh interrogation tactics elicit unreliable information, the Bush administration believed these enhanced interrogations provided critical information to preserve American lives. Critics, such as former CIA officer Bob Baer, have stated that information was suspect, you can get anyone to confess to anything if the tortures bad enough. On October 17, 2006, Bush signed into law the Military Commissions Act of 2006, a law enacted in the wake of the Supreme Courts decision in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , , which allows the U.S. government to prosecute unlawful enemy combatants by military commission rather than a standard trial. The law also denies them access to habeas corpus and bars the torture of detainees, but allows the president to determine what constitutes torture. On March 8, 2008, Bush vetoed H.R. 2082, a bill that would have expanded congressional oversight over the intelligence community and banned the use of waterboarding as well as other forms of interrogation not permitted under the United States Army Field Manual on Human Intelligence Collector Operations, saying that the bill Congress sent me would take away one of the most valuable tools in the War on Terror. In April 2009, the ACLU sued and won release of the secret memos that had authorized the Bush administrations interrogation tactics. One memo detailed specific interrogation tactics including a footnote that described waterboarding as torture as well as that the form of waterboarding used by the CIA was far more intense than authorized by the Justice Department. North Korea condemnation President Bush with Chinas President and Communist Party leader Hu Jintao, 2006 Bush publicly condemned Kim Jongil of North Korea, naming North Korea one of three states in an axis of evil, and saying that the United States of America will not permit the worlds most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the worlds most destructive weapons. Within months, both countries had walked away from their respective commitments under the U.S. DPRK Agreed Framework of October 1994. North Koreas October 9, 2006, detonation of a nuclear device further complicated Bushs foreign policy, which centered for both terms of his presidency on preventing the terrorists and regimes who seek chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons from threatening the United States and the world. Bush condemned North Koreas position, reaffirmed his commitment to a nuclearfree Korean Peninsula, and stated that transfer of nuclear weapons or material by North Korea to states or nonstate entities would be considered a grave threat to the United States, for which North Korea would be held accountable. On May 7, 2007, North Korea agreed to shut down its nuclear reactors immediately pending the release of frozen funds held in a foreign bank account. This was a result of a series of threeway talks initiated by the United States and including China. On September 2, 2007, North Korea agreed to disclose and dismantle all of its nuclear programs by the end of 2007. By May 2009, North Korea had restarted its nuclear program and threatened to attack South Korea. On June 22, 2010, While South Korea prospers, the people of North Korea have suffered profoundly, he said, adding that, communism had resulted in dire poverty, mass starvation and brutal suppression. In recent years, he went on to say, the suffering has been compounded by the leader who wasted North Koreas precious few resources on personal luxuries and nuclear weapons programs. Syria sanctions President Bush with Russian president Vladimir Putin in Shanghai, October 21, 2001 Bush expanded economic sanctions on Syria. In early 2007, the Treasury Department, acting on a June 2005 executive order, froze American bank accounts of Syrias Higher Institute of Applied Science and Technology, Electronics Institute, and National Standards and Calibration Laboratory. Bushs order prohibits Americans from doing business with these institutions suspected of helping spread weapons of mass destructionU.S. Treasury moves to clamp down on Syrian entities accused of spreading weapons. Registration required. January 4, 2007. Retrieved June 23, 2009. and being supportive of terrorism. Under separate executive orders signed by Bush in 2004 and later 2007, the Treasury Department froze the assets of two Lebanese and two Syrians, accusing them of activities to undermine the legitimate political process in Lebanon in November 2007. Those designated included Assaad Halim Hardan, a member of Lebanons parliament and current leader of the Syrian Socialist National Party Wiam Wahhab, a former member of Lebanons government under Prime Minister Omar Karami Hafiz Makhluf, a colonel and senior official in the Syrian General Intelligence Directorate and a cousin of Syrian President Bashar alAssad and Muhammad Nasif Khayrbik, identified as a close adviser to Assad. Africa Bush initiated the Presidents Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief Program . The U.S. government has spent some 44 billion on the project since 2003 , saving an estimated 5 million lives. According to The New York Times correspondent Peter Baker, Bush did more to stop AIDS and more to help Africa than any president before or since. Assassination attempt On May 10, 2005, Vladimir Arutyunian, a native Georgian who was born to a family of ethnic Armenians, threw a live hand grenade toward a podium where Bush was speaking at Freedom Square in Tbilisi, Georgia. Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili was seated nearby. It landed in the crowd about from the podium after hitting a girl, but it did not detonate. Arutyunian was arrested in July 2005, confessed, was convicted and was given a life sentence in January 2006. Other issues President Bush, Mahmoud Abbas, and Ariel Sharon meet at the Red Sea Summit in Aqaba, Jordan, June 4, 2003 Bush withdrew U.S. support for several international agreements, including the AntiBallistic Missile Treaty with Russia. He also signed the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty with Russia. Bush emphasized a careful approach to the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians he denounced Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat for his support of violence, but sponsored dialogues between Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and Palestinian National Authority President Mahmoud Abbas. Bush supported Sharons unilateral disengagement plan, and lauded the democratic elections held in Palestine after Arafats death. President Bush and Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko, April 1, 2008 Bush also expressed U.S. support for the defense of Taiwan following the standoff in April 2001 with the Peoples Republic of China over the Hainan Island incident, when an EP3E Aries II surveillance aircraft collided with a Peoples Liberation Army Air Force jet, leading to the detention of U.S. personnel. From 2003 to 2004, Bush authorized U.S. military intervention in Haiti and Liberia to protect U.S. interests. Bush condemned the militia attacks Darfur and denounced the killings in Sudan as genocide. Bush said that an international peacekeeping presence was critical in Darfur, but opposed referring the situation to the International Criminal Court. In the State of the Union address in January 2003, Bush outlined a fiveyear strategy for global emergency AIDS relief, the Presidents Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. Bush announced 15billion for this effort which directly supported lifesaving antiretroviral treatment for more than 3.2 million men, women and children worldwide. On June 10, 2007, Bush met with Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and became the first president to visit Albania. Bush has voiced his support for the independence of Kosovo. Bush opposed South Ossetias independence. On August 15, 2008, Bush said of Russias invasion of the country of Georgia Bullying and intimidation are not acceptable ways to conduct foreign policy in the 21st century. Bush opened the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah. Departing from previous practice, he stood among a group of U.S. athletes rather than from a ceremonial stand or box, saying On behalf of a proud, determined, and grateful nation, I declare open the Games of Salt Lake City, celebrating the Olympic Winter Games. In 2008, in the course of a goodwill trip to Asia, he attended the Summer Olympics in Beijing. Bush twice invoked Section 3 of the Twentyfifth Amendment, which allows a President to temporarily transfer the powers and duties of his office to the Vice President who then becomes Acting President. On June 29, 2002, Bush underwent a colonoscopy and chose to invoke Section 3 of the amendment, making Vice President Dick Cheney the Acting President. The medical procedure began at 709am. EDT and ended at 729am. EDT. Bush woke up twenty minutes later, but did not resume his presidential powers and duties until 924am. EDT after the presidents doctor, Richard Tubb, conducted an overall examination. Tubb said he recommended the additional time to make sure the sedative had no after effects. On July 21, 2007, Bush again invoked Section 3 in response to having to undergo a colonoscopy, again making Vice President Cheney the Acting President. Bush invoked Section 3 at 716am. EDT. He reclaimed his powers at 921am. EDT. In both cases, Bush specifically cited Section 3 when he transferred the Presidential powers to the Vice President and when he reclaimed those powers. Judicial appointments Supreme Court Supreme Court Justice nominee John Roberts and President Bush, July 19, 2005 Following the announcement of Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day OConnors retirement on July 1, 2005, Bush nominated John Roberts to succeed her. On September 5, following the death of Chief Justice William Rehnquist, this nomination was withdrawn and Bush instead nominated Roberts for Chief Justice to succeed Rehnquist. Roberts was confirmed by the Senate as the 17th Chief Justice on September 29, 2005. On October 3, 2005, Bush nominated long time White House Counsel Harriet Miers for OConnors position. After facing significant opposition from both parties, who found her to be illprepared and uninformed on the law,Greenburg, Jan Crawford. Supreme Conflict The Inside Story of the Struggle for Control of the United States Supreme Court.2007. Penguin Books. Page 278. Miers asked that her name be withdrawn on October 27. Four days later, on October 31, Bush nominated federal appellate judge Samuel Alito. Alito was confirmed as the 110th Supreme Court Justice on January 31, 2006. Other courts In addition to his two Supreme Court appointments, Bush appointed 61 judges to the United States courts of appeals and 261 judges to the United States district courts. Each of these numbers, along with his total of 324 judicial appointments, is third in American history, behind both Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton. Bush experienced a number of judicial appointment controversies. Debate during one confirmation session lasted 39 stupefying hours according to The New York Times . On August 3, 2001, the Senate did not consent to keep existing nominations in status quo , returning 40 judicial nominations, and 164 total nominations. At the outset, Judicature magazine noted that the Senate Democrats were gearing up for the approaching confirmation hearings before the first set of nominees were sent to the Senate. It then cites The New York Times as saying Senate Democrats have pledged they will not automatically vote to confirm Mr. Bushs judicial nominees and will subject them to intense scrutiny. The Senate confirmed only 8 out of 60 judicial nominations by October 2001. In February 2003, the Democrats successfully filibustered the nomination of Miguel Estrada. Cultural and political image Domestic FileGeorge W Bush approval ratings.svgthumbright Gallup USA Today Bush public opinion polling from February 2001 to January 2009 Image Bushs upbringing in West Texas, his accent, his vacations on his Texas ranch, and his penchant for country metaphors contribute to his folksy, American cowboy image. I think people look at him and think John Wayne, said Piers Morgan, editor of the British Daily Mirror . Bush has been parodied by the media, comedians, and other politicians. Detractors tended to cite linguistic errors made by Bush during his public speeches, which are colloquially referred to as Bushisms. In contrast to his father, who was perceived as having troubles with an overarching unifying theme, Bush embraced larger visions and was seen as a man of larger ideas and associated huge risks. Tony Blair wrote in 2010 that the caricature of Bush as being dumb is ludicrous and that Bush is very smart. In an interview with Playboy , New York Times columnist David Brooks said Bush was 60 IQ points smarter in private than he was in public. He doesnt want anybody to think hes smarter than they are, so puts on a Texas act. Job approval Bush began his presidency with approval ratings near 50percent. After the September 11 attacks, Bush gained an approval rating of 90percent, maintaining 80 to 90percent approval for four months after the attacks. It remained over 50percent during most of his first term and then fell to as low as 19percent in his second term. In 2000 and again in 2004, Time magazine named George W. Bush as its Person of the Year, a title awarded to someone who the editors believe has done the most to influence the events of the year. In May 2004, Gallup reported that 89percent of the Republican electorate approved of Bush. However, the support waned due mostly to a minority of Republicans frustration with him on issues of spending, illegal immigration, and Middle Eastern affairs. Within the United States armed forces, according to an unscientific survey, the president was strongly supported in the 2004 presidential elections. While 73percent of military personnel said that they would vote for Bush, 18percent preferred his Democratic rival, John Kerry. According to Peter Feaver, a Duke University political scientist who has studied the political leanings of the U.S. military, members of the armed services supported Bush because they found him more likely than Kerry to complete the War in Iraq. Bushs approval rating went below the 50percent mark in APIpsos polling in December 2004. Thereafter, his approval ratings and approval of his handling of domestic and foreign policy issues steadily dropped. Bush received heavy criticism for his handling of the Iraq War, his response to Hurricane Katrina and to the Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse, NSA warrantless surveillance, the Plame affair, and Guantanamo Bay detention camp controversies. There were calls for Bushs impeachment, though most polls showed a plurality of Americans would not support such an action. The arguments offered for impeachment usually centered on the NSA warrantless surveillance controversy, the Bush administrations justification for the war in Iraq, and alleged violations of the Geneva Conventions. Representative Dennis Kucinich , who had run against Bush during the 2004 presidential campaign, introduced 35 articles of impeachment on the floor of the House of Representatives against Bush on June 9, 2008, but Speaker Nancy Pelosi declared that impeachment was off the table. Polls conducted in 2006 showed an average of 37percent approval ratings for Bush, the lowest for any secondterm president at that point of his term since Harry S. Truman in March 1951 , which contributed to what Bush called the thumping of the Republican Party in the 2006 midterm elections. Throughout most of 2007, Bushs approval rating hovered in the midthirties the average for his entire second term was 37percent, according to Gallup. President Bushs approval rating with key events marked, 2001 2006 By the beginning of 2008, his final year in office, Bushs approval rating had dropped to a low of just 19percent, largely from the loss of support among Republicans. Commenting on his low poll numbers and accusations of being the worst president, Bush would say, I make decisions on what I think is right for the United States based upon principles. I frankly dont give a damn about the polls. In the spring of that year, Bushs disapproval ratings reached the highest ever recorded for any president in the 70year history of the Gallup poll, with 69percent of those polled in April 2008 disapproving of the job Bush was doing as president and 28percent approving although the majority of Republicans still approved of his job performance. In polls conducted in the fall, just before the 2008 election, his approval ratings remained at record lows of 19 to 20percent, while his disapproval ratings ranged from 67percent to as high as 75percent. In polling conducted January 9 11, 2009, his final job approval rating by Gallup was 34percent, which placed him on par with Jimmy Carter and Harry S. Truman, the other presidents whose final Gallup ratings measured in the low 30s . According to a CBS News New York Times poll conducted January 11 15, 2009, Bushs final approval rating in office was 22percent, the lowest in American history. Foreign perceptions President Bush with President Pervez Musharraf of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, September 22, 2006 Bush was criticized internationally and targeted by the global antiwar and antiglobalization campaigns for his administrations foreign policy. Views of him within the international community even in France, a close ally of the United States were more negative than those of most previous American presidents in history. Bush was described as having especially close personal relationships with Tony Blair of Great Britain and Vicente Fox of Mexico, although formal relations were sometimes strained. Other leaders, such as Afghan president Hamid Karzai, Ugandan president Yoweri Museveni, Spanish prime minister Jos Luis Rodrguez Zapatero, and Venezuelan president Hugo Chvez, openly criticized the president. Later in Bushs presidency, tensions arose between him and Vladimir Putin, which led to a cooling of their relationship. Antiwar demonstration during President Bushs visit to London, June 2008 In 2006, most respondents in 18 of 21 countries surveyed around the world were found to hold an unfavorable opinion of Bush. Respondents indicated that they judged his administration as negative for world security. In 2007, the Pew Global Attitudes Project reported that during the Bush presidency, attitudes towards the United States, and towards Americans, became less favorable around the world. A March 2007 survey of Arab opinion conducted by Zogby International and the University of Maryland found that Bush was the most disliked leader in the Arab world. The Pew Research Centers 2007 Global Attitudes poll found that out of 47 countries, in only nine countries did most respondents express a lot of confidence or some confidence in Bush Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Israel, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Mali, Nigeria, and Uganda. During a June 2007 visit to the predominantly Muslim Albania, Bush was greeted enthusiastically. Albania has a population of 2.8million, has troops in both Iraq and Afghanistan, and the countrys government is highly supportive of American foreign policy. A huge image of the President was hung in the middle of the capital city of Tirana flanked by Albanian and American flags while a local street was named after him. A shirtsleeved statue of Bush was unveiled in FushKruj, a few kilometers northwest of Tirana. The Bush administrations support for the independence of Albanianmajority Kosovo, while endearing him to the Albanians, has troubled U.S. relations with Serbia, leading to the February 2008 torching of the U.S. embassy in Belgrade. Acknowledgments and dedications The statue of George W. Bush was erected at FushKruj, Albania after his visit On May 7, 2005, during an official state visit to Latvia, Bush was awarded the Order of the Three Stars presented to him by President Vaira V7eFreiberga. A few places outside the United States bear Bushs name. In 2005, the Tbilisi City Council voted to rename a street in honor of the U.S. president. Previously known as Melaani Drive, the street links the Georgian capitals airport with the city center and was used by Bushs motorcade during his visit four months earlier. A street in Tirana, formerly known as Rruga Puntort e Rilendjes , situated directly outside the Albanian Parliament, was renamed after Bush a few days before he made the firstever visit by an American president to Albania in June 2007. In Jerusalem, a small plaza with a monument bearing his name is also dedicated to Bush.W. Bush Plaza, Jerusalem Flickr Condivisione di foto. Flickr.com. June 2, 2009. Retrieved July 15, 2013. In 2012, Estonian President Toomas Hendrik Ilves awarded Bush the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana for his work in expanding NATO. Reception The George W. Bush presidency has been ranked among the worst in surveys of presidential scholars published in the late 2000s and 2010s. After his reelection in 2004, Bush received increasingly heated criticism from across the political spectrum for his handling of the Iraq War, Hurricane Katrina, and other challenges. Amid this criticism, the Democratic Party regained control of Congress in the 2006 elections. In December 2007, the United States entered its longest postWorld War II recession, often referred to as the Great Recession, prompting the Bush administration to obtain congressional passage of multiple economic programs intended to preserve the countrys financial system. Nationally, Bush was both one of the most popular and unpopular presidents in history, having received the highest recorded presidential approval ratings in the wake of the September 11 attacks, as well as one of the lowest approval ratings during the 2008 financial crisis. For his part, Bush said in 2013, Ultimately history will judge the decisions I made, and I wont be around because it will take time for the objective historians to show up. So I am pretty comfortable with it. I did what I did. Postpresidency Residence George and Laura Bush waving to a crowd of 1000 at Andrews Air Force Base before their final departure to Texas, January 20, 2009 Following the inauguration of Barack Obama, Bush and his family flew from Andrews Air Force Base to a homecoming celebration in Midland, Texas, following which they returned to their ranch in Crawford, Texas. They bought a home in the Preston Hollow neighborhood of Dallas, Texas, where they settled down. He makes regular appearances at various events throughout the DallasFort Worth area, most notably when he conducted the opening coin toss at the Dallas Cowboys first game in the teams new stadium in Arlington and an April 2009 visit to a Texas Rangers game, where he thanked the people of Dallas for helping him settle in and was met with a standing ovation. He also attended every home playoff game for the Texas Rangers 2010 season and, accompanied by his father, threw out the ceremonial first pitch at Rangers Ballpark in Arlington for Game 4 of the 2010 World Series on October 31, 2010. On August 6, 2013, Bush was successfully treated for a coronary artery blockage with a stent. The blockage had been found during an annual medical examination. In reaction to the 2016 shooting of Dallas police officers, Bush stated Laura and I are heartbroken by the heinous acts of violence in our city last night. Murdering the innocent is always evil, never more so than when the lives taken belong to those who protect our families and communities.Heartbroken George W. Bush responds to the Dallas police ambush. Yahoo News . July 8, 2016. Publications and appearances George W. Bush, President Obama, and Bill Clinton meeting in the Oval Office, January 16, 2010 Since leaving office, Bush has kept a relatively low profile though he has made public appearances, most notably after the release of his memoirs in 2010 and for the 10th anniversary of the September 11 attacks in 2011. In March 2009, he delivered his first postpresidency speech in Calgary, Alberta, appeared via video on The Colbert Report during which he praised U.S. troops for earning a special place in American history, and attended the funeral of Senator Ted Kennedy. Bush made his debut as a motivational speaker on October 26 at the Get Motivated seminar in Dallas. In the aftermath of the Fort Hood shooting that took place on November 5, 2009, in Texas, the Bushes paid an undisclosed visit to the survivors and victims families the day following the shooting, having contacted the base commander requesting that the visit be private and not involve press coverage. Charlie Strong, Texas Longhorns head football coach, George W. Bush and Reverend Jesse Jackson hold up a Texas Longhorns football jersey at the LBJ Presidential Library in 2014 Bush released his memoirs, Decision Points , on November 9, 2010. During a prerelease appearance promoting the book, Bush said he considered his biggest accomplishment to be keeping the country safe amid a real danger, and his greatest failure to be his inability to secure the passage of Social Security reform. He also made news defending his administrations enhanced interrogation techniques, specifically the waterboarding of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, saying, Id do it again to save lives. In 2012, he wrote the foreword of The 4 Solution Unleashing the Economic Growth America Needs , an economics book published by the George W. Bush Presidential Center.Jamie Stengle, Bush institute launches book on economic growth, Lubbock AvalancheJournal , July 18, 2012Sonia Smith, George W. Bushs Armchair Economic Advice, Texas Monthly , July 17, 2012 He also presented the book at the Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas, Texas. Bush appeared on NBCs The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on November 19, 2013, along with the former First Lady, Laura Bush. When asked by Leno why he does not comment publicly about the Obama administration, Bush said, I dont think its good for the country to have a former president criticize his successor. Despite this statement, on Saturday, April 25, 2015, Bush criticized President Barack Obama at a meeting of the Republican Jewish Coalition at the Venetian Hotel in Las Vegas. Bush criticized Obamas handling of Iran, specifically with respect to sanctions and a nuclear deal, saying You think the Middle East is chaotic now Imagine what it looks like for our grandchildren. Thats how Americans should view the deal. Bush also attacked Obamas withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq in 2011, calling it a strategic blunder, borrowing a term that had been used by South Carolina Senator Lindsey Graham. Alongside the 2014 United States Africa Leaders Summit, Bush, Michelle Obama, the State Department, and the George W. Bush Institute hosted a daylong forum on education and health with the spouses of the African leaders attending the summit. Bush urged African leaders to avoid discriminatory laws that make the treatment of HIVAIDS more difficult. Bush has spoken in favor of increased global participation of women in politics and societal matters in foreign countries. On November 2, 2014, Bush spoke at an event to 200 business and civic leaders at the George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum to raise awareness for the upcoming Museum of the Bible in Washington D.C. Bush published a biography of his father, George Bush, called 41 A Portrait of My Father . It was released on November 11, 2014. In an interview published by Israel Hayom magazine on June 12, 2015, Bush said that boots on the ground would be needed in order to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant . He added that people had said during his Presidency that he should withdraw American troops from Iraq, but he chose the opposite, sending 30,000 more troops in order to defeat Al Qaeda in Iraq, and that Al Qaeda in Iraq was defeated. Bush was also asked about Iran but declined to answer, stating that any answer he gives would be interpreted as undermining President Barack Obama. In February 2016, George W. Bush spoke and campaigned for his brother Jeb Bush in South Carolina during a rally for the Jeb Bush presidential campaign in the 2016 Republican Party presidential primaries. While Bush endorsed the Republican Partys 2012 presidential nominee Mitt Romney, he declined to endorse the 2016 Republican nominee Donald Trump and he did not attend the 2016 Republican National Convention, which formally nominated Trump. On the eve of Trumps nomination, it was reported that Bush had privately expressed concern about the current direction of the Republican Party and told a group of his former aides and advisors, Im worried that I will be the last Republican president. Bush and his wife Laura did not vote for Trump in the 2016 presidential election according to a spokesperson for the Bush family, instead choosing to leave their presidential ballots blank. After the election, Bush, his father, and his brother Jeb called Trump on the phone to congratulate him on his victory. Both he and Laura attended Trumps inauguration, and images of Bush struggling to put on a rain poncho during the ceremony became an internet meme. In February 2017, Bush released a book of his own portraits of veterans called Portraits of Courage . Collaborations In January 2010, at President Obamas request, Bush and Bill Clinton established the Clinton Bush Haiti Fund to raise contributions for relief and recovery efforts following the 2010 Haiti earthquake earlier that month. On May 2, 2011, President Obama called Bush, who was at a restaurant with his wife, to inform him that Osama bin Laden had been killed. The Bushes joined the Obamas in New York City to mark the tenth anniversary of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. At the Ground Zero memorial, Bush read a letter that President Abraham Lincoln wrote to a widow who lost five sons during the Civil War. On September 7, 2017, Bush partnered with former Presidents Jimmy Carter, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and Barack Obama to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities. Art After serving as president, Bush began painting as a hobby after reading Winston Churchills essay Painting as a Pastime. Subjects have included people, dogs, and still life. He has also painted selfportraits and portraits of world leaders, including Vladimir Putin and Tony Blair. In February 2017, Bush released a book of portraits of veterans, Portraits of Courage . The net proceeds from his book are donated to the George W. Bush Presidential Center. Bill Arning, director of the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston, called his portraits thickly painted in what I would call highamateur mode and wrote, I would say they need to be less based on photographic reproduction. You can tell when someone is taking a found photograph and making a painting out of it ... I think hed be well advised to work from other, multiple photographic sources or the real person to get a little bit more liveliness going on. Legacy President Bushs legacy continues to develop today. Supporters credit Bushs counterterrorism policies with preventing another major terrorist attack from occurring in the US after 911 and also praise individual policies such as the Medicare prescription drug benefit and the AIDS relief program known as PEPFAR. Critics often point to his handling of the Iraq War, specifically the failure to find weapons of mass destruction, that were the main rationale behind the initial invasion as well as his handling of tax policy, Hurricane Katrina, climate change and the 2008 financial crisis as proof that George W. Bush was unfit to be president.Chait, Jonathan. Donald Trump Is Just George W. Bush But Racist. NYMag . 14 April 2017. 14 April 2017. Several historians and commentators hold the view that Bush was one of the most consequential presidents in American history. Princeton University scholar Julian Zelizer described Bushs presidency as a transformative one, and said that some people hate him, some people love him, but I do think hell have a much more substantive perception as time goes on. Bryon Williams of The Huffington Post referred to Bush as the most noteworthy president since FDR and said that the Patriot Act increased authority of the executive branch at the expense of judicial opinions about when searches and seizures are reasonable as evidence. Bushs administration presided over the largest tax cuts since the Reagan administration, and his homeland security reforms proved to be the most significant expansion of the federal government since the Great Society. Much of these policies have endured in the administrations of his two immediate successors, Barack Obama and Donald Trump. A 2010 Siena Research Institute survey of the opinions of historians, political scientists, and presidential scholars ranked him 39th out of 43 presidents. The survey respondents gave President Bush low ratings on his handling of the U.S. economy, communication, ability to compromise, foreign policy accomplishments, and intelligence. Among the public, his reputation has improved somewhat since his presidency ended in 2009. In February 2012, Gallup reported that Americans still rate George W. Bush among the worst presidents, though their views have become more positive in the three years since he left office. Gallup had earlier noted that Bushs favorability ratings in public opinion surveys had begun to rise a year after he had left office, from 40percent in January 2009 and 35percent in March 2009, to 45percent in July 2010, a period during which he had remained largely out of the news. Other pollsters have noted similar trends of slight improvement in Bushs personal favorability since the end of his presidency. In April 2013, Bushs approval rating stood at 47percent approval and 50percent disapproval in a poll jointly conducted for The Washington Post and ABC, his highest approval rating since December 2005. Bush had achieved notable gains among seniors, noncollege whites, and moderate and conservative Democrats since leaving office, although majorities disapproved of his handling of the economy and the Iraq War . His 47percent approval rating was equal to that of President Obamas in the same polling period. A CNN poll conducted that same month found that 55percent of Americans said Bushs presidency had been a failure, with opinions divided along party lines, and 43percent of independents calling it a success. See also Electoral history of George W. Bush Fictionalized portrayals of George W. Bush Political positions of George W. Bush List of George W. Bush legislation and programs List of multilingual presidents of the United States List of nicknames for George W. Bush List of nicknames used by George W. Bush List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience Bibliography of George W. Bush References Further reading Academic Abramson, Paul R., John H. Aldrich, and David W. Rohde. Change and Continuity in the 2004 and 2006 Elections , 324pp excerpt and text search Allard, Scott W. The Changing Face of Welfare During the Bush Administration. Publius 2007 37 304 332. Barone, Michael. The Almanac of American Politics , highly detailed coverage of electoral politics and Congress. Berggren, D. Jason, and Nicol C. Rae. Jimmy Carter and George W. Bush Faith, Foreign Policy, and an Evangelical Presidential Style. Presidential Studies Quarterly. 364 2006. pp 606. online edition Campbell, Colin, Bert A. Rockman, and Andrew Rudalevige, eds.. The George W. Bush Legacy Congressional Quarterly Press, 2007, 352pp 14 essays by scholars excerpts and online search from Amazon.com Congressional Quarterly. CQ Almanac Plus highly detailed annual compilation of events in Congress, White House, Supreme Court, summarizing the weekly Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report. Conlan, Tim and John Dinan. Federalism, the Bush Administration, and the Transformation of American Conservatism. Publius 2007 37 279 303. Corrado, Anthony, E. J. Dionne Jr., Kathleen A. Frankovic. The Election of 2000 Reports and Interpretations online edition Daynes, Byron W. and Glen Sussman. Comparing the Environmental Policies of Presidents George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush. White House Studies 2007 7 163 179. Desch, Michael C. Bush and the Generals. Foreign Affairs 2007 86 97 108. Fulltext Ebsco Eckersley, Robyn. Ambushed the Kyoto Protocol, the Bush Administrations Climate Policy and the Erosion of Legitimacy. International Politics 2007 44 306 324. Edwards III, George C. and Philip John Davies, eds. New Challenges for the American Presidency New York Pearson Longman, 2004. 245 pp. articles from Presidential Studies Quarterly Edwards III, George C. and Desmond King, eds. The Polarized Presidency of George W. Bush , 478pp essays by scholars excerpt and online search from Amazon.com Fortier, John C. and Norman J. Ornstein, eds. Secondterm Blues How George W. Bush Has Governed , 146pp excerpt and online search from Amazon.com Graham John D. Bush on the Home Front Domestic Policy Triumphs and Setbacks 425 pages covers taxation, education, health care, energy, the environment, and regulatory reform. Greenstein, Fred I. ed. The George W. Bush Presidency An Early Assessment Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003 Greenstein, Fred I. The Contemporary Presidency The Changing Leadership of George W. Bush A Pre and Post911 Comparison in Presidential Studies Quarterly v 322 2002 pp 387. online edition Gregg II, Gary L. and Mark J. Rozell, eds. Considering the Bush Presidency Oxford University Press, 2004. 210 pp. British perspectives Hendrickson, Ryan C., and Kristina Spohr Readman, From the Baltic to the Black Sea Bushs NATO Enlargement. White House Studies. 43 pp 319. online edition Hilliard, Bryan, Tom Lansford, and Robert P Watson, eds. George W. Bush Evaluating the President at Midterm SUNY Press 2004 Jacobson, Gary C. The Bush Presidency and the American Electorate Presidential Studies Quarterly v 33 No.4 2003 pp 701. online edition Jacobson, Gary C. Referendum the 2006 Midterm Congressional Elections. Political Science Quarterly 2007 122 1 24. Fulltext Ebsco Milkis, Sidney M. and Jesse H.Rhodes. George W. Bush, the Party System, and American Federalism. Publius 2007 37 478 503. Moens, Alexander The Foreign Policy of George W. Bush Values, Strategy, and Loyalty. Ashgate, 2004. 227 pp. Rabe, Barry. Environmental Policy and the Bush Era the Collision Between the Administrative Presidency and State Experimentation. Publius 2007 37 413 431. Sabato, Larry J. ed. The Sixth Year Itch The Rise and Fall of the George W. Bush Presidency , experts on the 2006 elections in major states Strozeski, Josh, et al. From Benign Neglect to Strategic Interest the Role of Africa in the Foreign Policies of Bush 41 and 43. White House Studies 2007 7 35 51. Wekkin, Gary D. George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush Puzzling Presidencies, or the Puzzle of the Presidency White House Studies 2007 7 113 124. Wong, Kenneth and Gail Sunderman. Education Accountability as a Presidential Priority No Child Left Behind and the Bush Presidency. Publius 2007 37 333 350. Reflections on the Bush presidency Barnes, Fred. RebelinChief How George W. Bush Is Redefining the Conservative Movement and Transforming America Bartlett, Bruce. Impostor How George W. Bush Bankrupted America and Betrayed the Reagan Legacy Cheney, Dick. In My Time A Personal and Political Memoir Draper, Robert. Inside the Bush White House The Presidency of George W. Bush Ferguson, Michaele L. and Lori Jo Marso. W Stands for Women How the George W. Bush Presidency Shaped a New Politics of Gender Gerson, Michael J. Heroic Conservatism Why Republicans Need to Embrace Americas Ideals , excerpt and text search Greenspan, Alan. The Age of Turbulence Adventures in a New World Hayes, Stephen F. Cheney The Untold Story of Americas Most Powerful and Controversial Vice President , excerpts and online search Hughes, Karen. George W. Bush Portrait of a Leader Mabry, Marcus. Twice as Good Condoleezza Rice and Her Path to Power Moore, James. and Wayne Slater. Bushs Brain How Karl Rove Made George W. Bush Presidential online edition Rice, Condoleezza. No Higher Honor A Memoir of My Years in Washington Rumsfeld, Donald. Known and Unknown A Memoir Suskind, Ron. The Price of Loyalty George W. Bush, the White House, and the Education of Paul ONeill , excerpts and online search from Amazon.com Woodward, Bob. Plan of Attack , excerpt and text search Primary sources Council of Economic Advisors, Economic Report of the President , complete series online important analysis of current trends and policies, plus statistical tables Bush, George W. George W. Bush on God and Country The President Speaks Out About Faith, Principle, and Patriotism External links Official George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum White House biography Speeches and statements Full audio of a number of Bush speeches Miller Center of Public Affairs Media coverage Other Essays on Bush, each member of his cabinet and the First Lady the Miller Center of Public Affairs Archived White House website from January 20, 2009 National Archives and Records Administration Collection of George W. Bushs works on the Troubled Asset Relief Program Category1946 births CategoryLiving people Category20thcentury American businesspeople Category20thcentury American Episcopalians Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury American writers Category20thcentury Methodists Category21stcentury American painters Category21stcentury American politicians Category21stcentury American writers Category21stcentury Methodists CategoryAmerican biographers CategoryAmerican businesspeople in the oil industry CategoryAmerican financiers CategoryAmerican investors CategoryAmerican male painters CategoryAmerican male writers CategoryAmerican memoirists CategoryAmerican motivational speakers CategoryAmerican people of Dutch descent CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of French descent CategoryAmerican people of German descent CategoryAmerican people of Irish descent CategoryAmerican people of Scottish descent CategoryAmerican people of Welsh descent CategoryAmerican political writers CategoryAmerican rugby union players CategoryAmerican United Methodists CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryAviators from Connecticut CategoryAviators from Texas CategoryBush family CategoryBusinesspeople from Connecticut CategoryChildren of Presidents of the United States CategoryConverts to Methodism CategoryFormer Anglicans CategoryGovernors of Texas CategoryGrand Crosses of the Order of Vytautas the Great CategoryHarvard Business School alumni CategoryThe Kinkaid School alumni CategoryLivingston family CategoryMale biographers CategoryNational Guard of the United States officers CategoryPainters from Connecticut CategoryPainters from Texas CategoryPeople associated with the September 11 attacks CategoryPeople from Midland, Texas CategoryPhillips Academy alumni CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRanchers from Texas CategoryRecipients of St. Georges Order of Victory CategoryRecipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class CategoryRecipients of the Order pro merito Melitensi CategoryRecipients of the Star of Romania Order CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party state governors of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategorySchuyler family CategorySons of the American Revolution CategorySportspeople from New Haven, Connecticut CategorySportspeople from Texas CategoryMethodists from Texas CategoryTexas Rangers executives CategoryTexas Rangers owners CategoryTexas Republicans CategoryUnited States Air Force officers CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 2000 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 2004 CategoryWhitney family of Connecticut CategoryWriters from New Haven, Connecticut CategoryWriters from Texas CategoryYale Universityalumni
Harry S. Truman was an American statesman who served as the 33rd President of the United States , taking the office upon the death of Franklin D. Roosevelt. A World War I veteran, he assumed the presidency during the waning months of World War II and the beginning of the Cold War. He is known for approving the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the Marshall Plan to rebuild the economy of Western Europe, the establishment of the Truman Doctrine and NATO against Soviet and Chinese communism, and for intervening in the Korean War. In domestic affairs, he was a moderate Democrat whose liberal proposals were a continuation of Franklin Roosevelts New Deal, but the conservativedominated Congress blocked most of them. He used the veto power 180 times, more than any president since then, and saw 12 overridden by Congress only Grover Cleveland and Franklin D. Roosevelt used the veto so often, and only Gerald Ford and Andrew Johnson saw so many veto overrides. He is the only world leader to have ever used nuclear weapons in war, desegregated the U.S. Armed Forces, supported a newly independent Israel, and was a founder of the United Nations. Truman was born in Lamar, Missouri, and spent most of his youth on his familys 600acre farm near Independence. In the last months of World War I, he served in combat in France as an artillery officer with his National Guard unit. After the war, he briefly owned a haberdashery in Kansas City, Missouri, and joined the Democratic Party and the political machine of Tom Pendergast. Truman was first elected to public office as a county official in 1922, and then as a U.S. Senator in 1934. He gained national prominence as chairman of the Truman Committee, formed in March 1941, which aimed to find and correct problems such as waste and inefficiency in Federal Government wartime contracts. After serving as a United States Senator from Missouri and briefly as Vice President , he succeeded to the presidency on April 12, 1945, upon the death of Franklin D. Roosevelt. Germany surrendered on Trumans 61st birthday, just a few weeks after he assumed the presidency, but the war with Imperial Japan raged on and was expected to last at least another year. Truman approved the use of atomic bombs to end the fighting and to spare the American and Japanese lives that would inevitably be lost in the planned invasion of Japan and Japaneseheld islands in the Pacific. Although this decision and the numerous issues that arose as a result of it remain the subject of debate to this day, most historians agree that it was one of the principal factors that forced Japans unconditional surrender. Truman presided over an unexpected surge in economic prosperity as America sought readjustment after long years of depression and war. His presidency was a turning point in foreign affairs, as the United States engaged in an internationalist foreign policy and renounced isolationism. Truman helped found the United Nations in 1945, issued the Truman Doctrine in 1947 to contain Communism, and got the 13billion Marshall Plan enacted to rebuild Western Europe. His political coalition was based on the white South, labor unions, farmers, ethnic groups, and traditional Democrats across the North. Truman was able to rally these groups of supporters during the 1948 presidential election and win a surprise victory that secured a presidential term in his own right. The Soviet Union, then led by Joseph Stalin, became an enemy in the Cold War. Truman oversaw the Berlin Airlift of 1948 and the creation of NATO in 1949 but was unable to stop Communists from taking over China, and survived unharmed from an assassination attempt in 1950. When communist North Korea invaded South Korea in 1950, he sent U.S. troops and gained UN approval for the Korean War.United Nations Security Council Resolutions 82, 83, 84, 85 and 88 After initial successes in Korea, however, the UN forces were thrown back by Chinese intervention, and the conflict was stalemated throughout the final years of Trumans presidency. On domestic issues, bills endorsed by Truman often faced opposition from a conservative Congress dominated by the Southern legislators, but his administration was able to successfully guide the American economy through the postwar economic challenges. Truman maintained that civil rights were a moral priority, and in 1948 submitted the first comprehensive civil rights legislation and issued Executive Orders to start racial integration in the military and federal agencies. Allegations were raised of corruption in the Truman administration, linked to certain cabinet members and senior White House staff this became a central campaign issue in the 1952 presidential election, and helped account for Republican Dwight D. Eisenhowers electoral victory. Scholars, starting in 1962, ranked Trumans presidency as near great since then he has been ranked between 5th and 9th in historical rankings of U.S. Presidents. Early life and career Harry S. Truman was born in Lamar, Missouri on May 8, 1884, the oldest child of John Anderson Truman and Martha Ellen Young Truman . His parents chose the name Harry after his mothers brother, Harrison Harry Young . While the S did not stand for any one name, it was chosen as his middle initial to honor both of his grandfathers, Anderson Shipp Truman and Solomon Young. The initial has been regularly written and printed followed by a period. A brother, John Vivian , was born soon after Harry, followed by sister Mary Jane . John Truman was a farmer and livestock dealer. The family lived in Lamar until Harry was ten months old, when they moved to a farm near Harrisonville, Missouri. The family next moved to Belton, and in 1887 to his grandparents 600acre farm in Grandview. When Truman was six, his parents moved to Independence, so he could attend the Presbyterian Church Sunday School. Truman did not attend a traditional school until he was eight. While living in Independence, he served as a Shabbos goy for Jewish neighbors, doing tasks for them on Shabbat that their tradition prevented them doing on that day. As a boy, Truman was interested in music, reading, war, and history, all encouraged by his mother, with whom he was very close. As president, he solicited political as well as personal advice from her. He rose at five every morning to practice the piano, which he studied twice a week until he was fifteen. Truman worked as a page at the 1900 Democratic National Convention at Convention Hall in Kansas City his father had many friends who were active in the Democratic Party and helped young Harry to gain his first political position. After graduating from Independence High School in 1901, Truman enrolled in Spaldings Commercial College, a Kansas City business school he studied bookkeeping, shorthand, and typing, but left after a year. He made use of his business college experience to obtain a job as a timekeeper on the Atchison, Topeka Santa Fe Railway, sleeping in hobo camps near the rail lines. He then took on a series of clerical jobs, and was employed briefly in the mail room of the Kansas City Star. Truman and his brother Vivian later worked as clerks at the National Bank of Commerce in Kansas City one of their coworkers, who also lived in the same rooming house, was Arthur Eisenhower, the brother of Dwight and Milton. Truman returned to the Grandview farm in 1906, where he lived until entering the army in 1917 after the beginning of the Great War. During this period, he courted Bess Wallace he proposed in 1911, but she turned him down. Truman later said he intended to propose again, but he wanted to be earning more money than a farmer earns. To that end, during his years on the farm and immediately after World War I, he became active in several business ventures, including a lead and zinc mine near Commerce, Oklahoma, a company that bought land and leased the oil drilling rights to prospectors, and speculating in Kansas City real estate. Truman occasionally derived some income from these enterprises, but none proved successful in the long term. Truman is the most recent president who did not earn a college degree. In addition to having briefly attended business college, from 1923 to 1925 he took night courses toward an LL.B. at the Kansas City Law School , but dropped out after losing reelection as county judge. He was informed by attorneys in the Kansas City area that his education and experience were probably sufficient to receive a license to practice law, but did not pursue it because he won election as presiding judge. While serving as president in 1947, Truman applied for a license to practice law. A friend who was an attorney began working out the arrangements, and informed Truman that his application had to be notarized. By the time Truman received this information he had changed his mind, so he never sought notarization. After rediscovery of Trumans application, in 1996 the Missouri Supreme Court issued Truman a posthumous honorary law license. World War I Truman in uniform ca. 1918 Because he was unable to afford university tuition, Truman had thought of going to the costless United States Military Academy at West Point, but he was refused an appointment because of poor eyesight. He enlisted in the Missouri Army National Guard in 1905, serving until 1911 in a Kansas Citybased artillery battery and attaining the rank of corporal. At his induction, his eyesight had been an unacceptable 2050 in the right eye and 20400 in the left . The second time he took the test, he passed by secretly memorizing the eye chart. When the United States entered World War I, Truman rejoined the National Guard he helped recruit new soldiers as his unit expanded, and his success led the men of his battery to elect him as their first lieutenant. Before deployment to France, Truman was sent for training to Camp Doniphan, Fort Sill, near Lawton, Oklahoma when his regiment was federalized as the 129th Field Artillery. The regimental commander during its training was Robert M. Danford, who later served as the Armys Chief of Field Artillery. Truman later said he learned more practical, useful information from Danford in six weeks than from six months of formal Army instruction, and when Truman later served as an artillery instructor, he consciously patterned his approach on Danfords. Truman also ran the camp canteen with Edward Jacobson, a clothing store clerk he knew from Kansas City. Unlike most canteens funded by unit members, which usually lost money, the canteen operated by Truman and Jacobson turned a profit, returning each soldiers initial 2 investment and 10,000 in dividends in six months. At Fort Sill, Truman met Lieutenant James M. Pendergast, nephew of Thomas Joseph Pendergast, a Kansas City political boss, and this connection had a profound influence on Trumans later life. In mid1918, about one million soldiers of the American Expeditionary Forces were in France. Truman was promoted to captain in July 1918 and became commander of Battery D, 129th Field Artillery, 60th Artillery Brigade, 35th Division. It was known for its discipline problems, and Truman was initially unpopular because of his efforts to restore order. Despite attempts by the men to intimidate him into quitting, Truman succeeded by making his corporals and sergeants accountable for discipline he promised to back them up if they performed capably, and reduce them to private and return them to the ranks if they did not. In an event memorialized in battery lore as the Battle of Who Run, his soldiers began to flee during a sudden attack by the Germans in the Vosges Mountains Truman succeeded at ordering his men to stay and fight, using profanity that he had first heard while working on the Santa Fe Railroad. The men were so surprised to hear Truman use such language that they immediately obeyed. Trumans unit joined in a massive prearranged assault barrage on September 26, 1918, at the opening of the MeuseArgonne Offensive. They advanced with difficulty over pitted terrain to follow the infantry, and they set up an observation post west of Cheppy. On September 27, Truman saw through his binoculars an enemy artillery battery setting up across a river in a position allowing them to fire upon the neighboring 28th Division. Trumans orders limited him to targets facing the 35th Division, but he ignored this and patiently waited until the Germans had walked their horses well away from their guns, ensuring they could not relocate out of range of Trumans battery, and then he ordered his men to open fire. The enemy battery was destroyed. His actions were credited with saving the lives of 28th Division soldiers who otherwise would have come under fire from the Germans. Truman was given a dressing down by his regimental commander, Colonel Karl D. Klemm, but he was not courtmartialed or otherwise punished. In other action during the MeuseArgonne fighting, Trumans battery provided support for George S. Pattons tank brigade, and his battery fired some of the last shots of the war on November 11, 1918. Battery D did not lose any men while under Trumans command in France. To show their appreciation of his leadership, his men presented him with a large loving cup upon their return to the United States after the war. The war was a transformative experience for Truman that brought out his leadership qualities. He had entered the service in 1917 as a family farmer who had worked in clerical jobs that did not require the ability to motivate and direct others, but during the war he gained leadership experience and a record of success that greatly enhanced and supported his postwar political career in Missouri. Truman was brought up in the Presbyterian and Baptist churches. He avoided revivals and sometimes ridiculed revivalist preachers. He rarely spoke about religion, which to him, primarily meant ethical behavior along traditional Protestant lines. Most of the soldiers he commanded in the war were Catholics developing leadership and interpersonal skills that later made him a successful politician helped him get along with them, as he did with soldiers of other Christian denominations and the units Jewish members... Continued military service Truman was discharged from the Army as a major in May 1919. In 1920 he was appointed a major in the Reserve Officer Corps he became a lieutenant colonel in 1925 and a colonel in 1932. In the 1920s and 1930s Truman commanded 1st Battalion, 379th Field Artillery Regiment, a unit of the 102nd Infantry Division. After promotion to colonel, Truman advanced to command of the regiment. After his election to the U.S. Senate, Truman was transferred to the General Assignments Group, a holding unit for less active officers he had not been consulted or notified in advance. Army History Truman, youre too old Truman protested his reassignment, which led to his resumption of regimental command. He remained an active reservist until the early 1940s. Truman volunteered for active military service during World War II, but was not accepted, partly because of age, and partly because President Franklin D. Roosevelt desired Senators and Congressman who belonged to the military reserves to support the war effort by remaining in Congress, or by ending their active duty service and resuming their Congressional seats. He was an inactive reservist from the early 1940s until retiring on January 20, 1953.Pullen, Twice the Citizen Politics As Jackson County judge Harry and Bess Truman on their wedding day, June 28, 1919 After his wartime service, Truman returned to Independence, where he married Bess Wallace on June 28, 1919. The couple had one child, Mary Margaret Truman. Shortly before the wedding, Truman and Jacobson opened a haberdashery together at 104 West 12th Street in downtown Kansas City. After brief initial success, the store went bankrupt during the recession of 1921. Truman did not pay off the last of the debts from that venture until 1934, when he did so with the aid of a political supporter. Jacobson and Truman remained close friends, and Jacobsons advice to Truman on Zionism later played a role in the U.S. governments decision to recognize Israel. With the help of the Kansas City Democratic machine led by Tom Pendergast, Truman was elected in 1922 as County Court judge of Jackson Countys eastern district this was an administrative rather than judicial position, somewhat similar to county commissioners elsewhere. , one from the eastern district , and a presiding judge elected countywide. Truman was not reelected in 1924, losing in a Republican wave led by President Calvin Coolidges landslide election to a full term. Two years selling automobile club memberships convinced him that a public service career was safer for a family man approaching middle age, and he planned a run for presiding judge in 1926. In 1926, Truman was elected presiding judge with the support of the Pendergast machine, and he was reelected in 1930. Truman helped coordinate the Ten Year Plan , which transformed Jackson County and the Kansas City skyline with new public works projects, including an extensive series of roads and construction of a new Wight and Wightdesigned County Court building. Also in 1926, he became president of the National Old Trails Road Association . He oversaw the dedication in the late 1920s of a series of 12 Madonna of the Trail monuments honoring pioneer women, which were installed along the trail. In 1933, Truman was named Missouris director for the Federal ReEmployment program at the request of Postmaster General James Farley. This was payback to Pendergast for delivering the Kansas City vote to Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1932 presidential election. The appointment confirmed Pendergasts control over federal patronage jobs in Missouri and marked the zenith of his power. It also created a relationship between Truman and Roosevelt aide Harry Hopkins and assured Trumans avid support for the New Deal. As U.S. Senator from Missouri Drawer from the Senate desk used by Truman After serving as a county judge, Truman wanted to run for Governor or Congress, but Pendergast rejected these ideas. Truman then thought he might serve out his career in some wellpaying county sinecure, but circumstances changed when Pendergast reluctantly backed him in the 1934 Democratic primary for the U.S. Senate after four other potential candidates turned him down. In the primary, Truman defeated Congressmen John J. Cochran and Jacob L. Milligan with the solid support of Jackson County, which was crucial to his candidacy, as were the contacts he had made statewide as a county official, Mason, military reservist, and member of the American Legion. In the general election, Truman defeated incumbent Republican Roscoe C. Patterson by nearly 20 percentage points as part of a continuing wave of proNew Deal Democrats elected in response to the Great Depression. Truman assumed office with a reputation as the Senator from Pendergast. He turned over patronage decisions to Pendergast, though Truman always maintained that he voted with his conscience. He later defended the patronage decisions by saying that by offering a little to the machine, he saved a lot. In his first term, Truman spoke out against corporate greed and the dangers of Wall Street speculators and other moneyed special interests attaining too much influence in national affairs. He was largely ignored by Democratic President Roosevelt and had trouble getting calls returned from the White House. During the U.S. Senate election in 1940, United States Attorney Maurice Milligan and former governor Lloyd Stark both challenged Truman in the Democratic primary. Truman was politically weakened by Pendergasts imprisonment for income tax evasion the previous year the senator had remained loyal, having claimed that Republican judges were responsible for the bosss downfall. St. Louis party leader Robert E. Hannegans support of Truman proved crucial he later brokered the deal that put Truman on the national ticket. In the end, Stark and Milligan split the antiPendergast vote in the Senate Democratic primary and Truman won by a total of 8,000 votes. In the November election, Truman defeated Republican Manvel H. Davis by 51 49 percent. In late 1940, Truman traveled to various military bases. The waste and profiteering he saw led him to use his subcommittee chairmanship in the Committee on Military Affairs to start investigations into abuses while the nation prepared for war. A separate committee was set up under Truman to conduct a formal investigation the Roosevelt administration supported this plan rather than weather a more hostile probe by the House of Representatives. Chairmanship of what came to be known as the Truman Committee made him a national figure. Activities of the Truman Committee ranged from criticizing the dollarayear men hired by the government, many of whom proved ineffective, to investigating a shoddily built New Jersey housing project for war workers.. The committee is reported to have saved as much as 15billion its activities put Truman on the cover of Time magazine. According to the Senates historical minutes, in leading the committee, Truman erased his earlier public image as an errandrunner for Kansas City politicos and no senator ever gained greater political benefits from chairing a special investigating committee than did Missouris Harry S. Truman. Senator Truman opposed both Nazi Germany and Communist Russia. One week after Hitler invaded the Soviet Union in 1941, he said If we see that Germany is winning we ought to help Russia, and if Russia is winning we ought to help Germany, and that way let them kill as many as possible although I dont want to see Hitler victorious under any circumstances. Vice Presidency Vice President Henry Wallace was popular among Democratic voters, but he was viewed as too far to the left and too friendly to labor for some of Roosevelts advisers. The President and several of his confidantes wanted to replace Wallace with someone more acceptable to Democratic Party leaders and Roosevelts advisors, knowing that Roosevelt might not live out a fourth term. Outgoing Democratic National Committee chairman Frank C. Walker, incoming chairman Hannegan, party treasurer Edwin W. Pauley, strategist Ed Flynn, Chicago Mayor Edward Joseph Kelly, and lobbyist George E. Allen all wanted to keep Wallace off the ticket. Roosevelt told party leaders that he would accept either Truman or Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas. State and city party leaders strongly preferred Truman, and Roosevelt agreed. Truman did not campaign for the VicePresidential spot, though he welcomed the attention as evidence that he had become more than the Senator from Pendergast. Trumans nomination was dubbed the Second Missouri Compromise and was well received. The Roosevelt Truman ticket achieved a 432 99 electoralvote victory in the election, defeating the Republican ticket of Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York and running mate Governor John Bricker of Ohio. Truman was sworn in as vice president on January 20, 1945. Trumans brief vicepresidency was relatively uneventful. On April 10, 1945,Occasions When Vice Presidents Have Voted to Break Tie Votes in the Senate, Senate Historical Office, United States Senate. Truman cast his only tiebreaking vote as President of the Senate, against a Robert A. Taft amendment that would have blocked the postwar delivery of LendLease Act items contracted for during the war.Harold Foote Gosnell, Trumans Crises A Political Biography of Harry S. Truman , p. 212 On only one occasion did Truman break a tie, and this was when his negative vote defeated a Taft amendment to the LendLease Act which would have prevented postwar delivery of lendlease goods contracted for during the war.Robert C. Byrd, Senate, 1789 1989, Vol. 1 Addresses on the History of the United States Senate , p. 534 In his eightytwo days as vice president, he had the opportunity to vote only onceon an amendment to limit the LendLease extension bill. The vote was tied, and Truman voted no, which, in a sense, was unnecessary since the bill would have died even without his vote. Roosevelt rarely contacted him, even to inform him of major decisions the President and Vice President met alone together only twice during their time in office. In one of his first acts as vice president, Truman created some controversy when he attended the disgraced Pendergasts funeral. He brushed aside the criticism, saying simply, He was always my friend and I have always been his. He had rarely discussed world affairs or domestic politics with Roosevelt he was uninformed about major initiatives relating to the war and the topsecret Manhattan Project, which was about to test the worlds first atomic bomb. He was also photographed with actress Lauren Bacall sitting atop the piano at the National Press Club as he played for soldiers. Truman had been vice president for 82 days when President Roosevelt died on April 12, 1945. That afternoon, Truman presided over the Senate as usual. He had just adjourned the session for the day and was preparing to have a drink in House Speaker Sam Rayburns office when he received an urgent message to go immediately to the White House. Truman assumed President Roosevelt wanted to meet with him, but Eleanor Roosevelt informed him her husband had died after suffering a massive cerebral hemorrhage. Trumans first concern was for Mrs. Roosevelt. He asked if there was anything he could do for her, to which she replied, Is there anything we can do for you For you are the one in trouble now Presidency Truman surrounded himself with his old friends, and appointed several to high positions that seemed well beyond their competence, including his two secretaries of the treasury, Fred Vinson and John Snyder. His closest friend in the White House was his military aide Harry H. Vaughan, who seemed to others like a huge joke. Truman loved to spend as much time as possible playing poker, telling stories and sipping bourbon. Alonzo Hamby notes that to many in the general public, gambling and bourbon swilling, however lowkey, were not quite presidential. Neither was the intemperant give em hell campaign style nor the occasional profane phrase uttered in public. Poker exemplified a larger problem the tension between his attempts at an image of leadership necessarily a cut above the ordinary and an informality that at times appeared to verge on crudeness. First term Assuming office and the atomic bomb Joseph Stalin, Harry S. Truman, and Winston Churchill in Potsdam, July 1945 Shortly after taking the oath of office, Truman spoke to reporters Boys, if you ever pray, pray for me now. I dont know if you fellas ever had a load of hay fall on you, but when they told me what happened yesterday, I felt like the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fallen on me. Upon assuming the presidency, Truman asked all the members of Roosevelts cabinet to remain in place, and told them he was open to their advice. He emphasized a central principle of his administration he would be the one making decisions, and they were to support him. Although Truman was told briefly on the afternoon of April 12 that the Allies had a new, highly destructive weapon, it was not until April 25 that Secretary of War Henry Stimson told him the details. Truman benefited from a honeymoon period after Roosevelts death, and from the Allies success in Europe, ending the war against Nazi Germany. Truman was pleased to issue the proclamation of VE Day on May 8, 1945, his 61st birthday. In the wake of Allied victory, Truman journeyed to Europe for the Potsdam Conference. He was there when he learned that the Trinity test of the first atomic bomb on July 16 had been successful. He hinted to Joseph Stalin that the U.S. was about to use a new kind of weapon against the Japanese. Though this was the first time the Soviets had been officially given information about the atomic bomb, Stalin was already aware of the bomb project, having learned about it long before Truman did. In August, the Japanese government refused surrender demands as specifically outlined in the Potsdam Declaration. With the invasion of mainland Japan imminent, Truman approved the schedule for dropping the two available bombs. Truman always said that attacking Japan with atomic bombs saved many lives on both sides military estimates for the invasion of mainland Japan were that it could take a year and result in 250,000 to 500,000 American casualties. Hiroshima was bombed on August 6, and Nagasaki three days later, leaving 105,000 dead. The Soviet Union declared war on Japan on August 9 and invaded Manchuria. Japan agreed to surrender the following day. Truman announces Japans surrender. Washington, DC, August 14, 1945 Supporters of Trumans decision argue that, given the tenacious Japanese defense of the outlying islands, the bombings saved hundreds of thousands of lives that would have been lost invading mainland Japan. Critics have argued that the use of nuclear weapons was unnecessary, given that conventional tactics such as firebombing and a naval blockade might have induced Japans surrender without the need for such weapons.. Truman strongly defended himself in his memoirs in 1955 56, stating that many lives could have been lost had the U.S. invaded mainland Japan without the atomic bombs. In 1963, he stood by his decision, telling a journalist that it was done to save 125,000 youngsters on the American side and 125,000 on the Japanese side from getting killed and that is what it did. It probably also saved a half million youngsters on both sides from being maimed for life. Strikes and economic upheaval The end of World War II was followed by an uneasy transition from war to a peacetime economy. The costs of the war effort had been enormous, and Truman was intent on decreasing government expenditures on the military as quickly as possible. Demobilizing the military and reducing the size of the various services was a costsaving priority. The effect of demobilization on the economy was unknown, but fears existed that the nation would slide back into a depression. A great deal of work had to be done to plan how best to transition to peacetime production of goods while avoiding mass unemployment for returning veterans. Government officials did not have consensus as to what economic course the postwar U.S. should take. In addition, Roosevelt had not paid attention to Congress in his final years, and Truman faced a body where a combination of Republicans and conservative southern Democrats formed a powerful voting bloc. The president was faced with the reawakening of labormanagement conflicts that had lain dormant during the war years, severe shortages in housing and consumer products, and widespread dissatisfaction with inflation, which at one point hit 6 in a single month. Added to this polarized environment was a wave of destabilizing strikes in major industries. Trumans response to them was generally seen as ineffective. A rapid increase in costs was fueled by the release of price controls on most items, and labor sought wage increases. A serious steel strike in January 1946 involving 800,000 workers the largest in the nations history was followed by a coal strike in April and a rail strike in May. The public was angry, with a majority in polls favoring a ban on strikes by public service workers and a years moratorium on labor actions. For commodities where price controls remained, producers were often unwilling to sell at artificially low prices farmers refused to sell grain for months in 1945 and 1946 until payments were significantly increased, even though grain was desperately needed, not only for domestic use, but to stave off starvation in Europe. Truman with Greek American sponge divers, Florida, 1947 When a national rail strike threatened in May 1946, Truman seized the railroads. Two key railway unions struck anyway and the entire national railroad system was shut down 24,000 freight trains and 175,000 passenger trains a day stopped moving.View a contemporary newsreel report For two days public anger mounted and no one was angrier than Truman himself. He drafted a message to Congress that called on veterans to form a lynch mob and destroy the union leaders Every single one of the strikers and their demagogue leaders have been living in luxury. . . . Now I want you who are my comrades in arms . . . to come with me and eliminate the Lewises, the Whitneys, the Johnstons, the Communist Bridges important union officials and the Russian Senators and Representatives . . . Lets put transportation and production back to work, hang a few traitors and make our own country safe for democracy. His staff was stunned top aide Clark Clifford rewrote and toned down the speech. Truman did go to Congress and he called for a new law to draft all the railroad strikers into the Army. As he was concluding his speech he read a message just handed to him that said the strike was settled on presidential terms. Truman nevertheless finished the speech, and a few hours later the House voted to draft the strikers. Taft killed the bill in the Senate. Although labor strife was muted after the settlement of the railway strike, it continued through Trumans presidency. The Presidents approval rating dropped from 82 in the polls in January 1946 to 52 by June. This dissatisfaction with the Truman administrations policies led to large Democratic losses in the 1946 midterm elections, when Republicans took control of Congress for the first time since 1930. The 80th Congress included Republican freshmen who would become prominent in the years to come, including Wisconsin Senator Joe McCarthy and California Congressman Richard Nixon. When Truman dropped to 32 in the polls, Democratic Arkansas Senator William Fulbright suggested that Truman resign the President said he did not care what Senator Halfbright said. Truman cooperated closely with the Republican leaders on foreign policy, though he fought them bitterly on domestic issues. The power of the labor unions was significantly curtailed by the Taft Hartley Act, which was enacted over Trumans veto. Truman twice vetoed bills to lower income tax rates in 1947. Although the initial vetoes were sustained, Congress overrode his veto of a tax cut bill in 1948. The parties did cooperate on some issues Congress passed the Presidential Succession Act of 1947, making the Speaker of the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate rather than the Secretary of State next in line to the presidency after the Vice President. As he readied for the 1948 election, Truman made clear his identity as a Democrat in the New Deal tradition, advocating national health insurance,. and repeal of the Taft Hartley Act. He broke with the New Deal by initiating an aggressive civil rights program, which he termed a moral priority. Taken together, it constituted a broad legislative agenda that came to be called the Fair Deal. Trumans proposals were not well received by Congress, even with renewed Democratic majorities in Congress after 1948. The Solid South rejected civil rights, as those states still enforced segregation. Only one of the major Fair Deal bills, the Housing Act of 1949, was ever enacted.. On the other hand, the major New Deal programs still in operation were not repealed, and there were minor improvements and extensions in many of them. United Nations, Marshall Plan, Cold War, China Trumans press secretary was his old friend Charles Griffith Ross. He had great integrity but, says Alonzo L. Hamby, as a senior White House aide he was, A better news man than news handler, he never established a policy of coordinating news releases throughout the executive branch, frequently bumbled details, never developed...a strategy for marketing the presidents image, and failed to establish a strong press office. As a Wilsonian internationalist, Truman strongly supported the creation of the United Nations, and included Eleanor Roosevelt on the delegation to the UNs first General Assembly. With the Soviet Union expanding its sphere of influence through Eastern Europe, Truman and his foreign policy advisors took a hard line against the USSR. In this, he matched American public opinion, which quickly came to view the Soviets were intent upon world domination. Although he had little personal expertise on foreign matters, Truman listened closely to his top advisors, especially George Marshall and Dean Acheson. He won bipartisan support for both the Truman Doctrine, which formalized a policy of Soviet containment, and the Marshall Plan, which aimed to help rebuild postwar Europe. To get Congress to spend the vast sums necessary to restart the moribund European economy, Truman used an ideological argument, arguing that Communism flourishes in economically deprived areas. As part of the U.S. Cold War strategy, Truman signed the National Security Act of 1947 and reorganized military forces by merging the Department of War and the Department of the Navy into the National Military Establishment and creating the U.S. Air Force. The act also created the CIA and the National Security Council. In 1952, Truman secretly consolidated and empowered the cryptologic elements of the United States by creating the National Security Agency . In theory, the CIA had the purview to gather, process, and analyze national security information from around the world. The CIAs legacy was not lost on Truman, he wrote a letter to the Washington Post in December 1963, calling for the CIAs remit to be scaled back significantly For some time I have been disturbed by the way the CIA has been diverted from its original assignment. It has become an operational and at times a policymaking arm of the government. This has led to trouble and may have compounded our difficulties in several explosive areas.Limit CIA Role To Intelligence by Harry S Truman, The Washington Post, December 22, 1963 Truman was torn two ways about China, where the Nationalists and Communists were fighting a largescale civil war. On the one hand, the Nationalists had been major wartime allies and had largescale popular support in the United States, along with a powerful lobby. General George Marshall spent most of 1946 in China trying to negotiate a compromise, but failed. He convinced Truman that the Nationalists would never win on their own, and that a very largescale American intervention to stop the Communists would significantly weaken Americas opposition to the Soviets in Europe. By 1949, the Communists under Mao Zedong had won the civil war, the United States had a new enemy in Asia, and Truman came under fire from conservatives for losing China.May, Ernest R. 194748 When Marshall Kept the U.S. out of War in China. Journal of Military History 664 1001 1010. online Berlin airlift On June 24, 1948, the Soviet Union blocked access to the three Westernheld sectors of Berlin. The Allies had not negotiated a deal to guarantee supply of the sectors deep within the Sovietoccupied zone. The commander of the American occupation zone in Germany, General Lucius D. Clay, proposed sending a large armored column across the Soviet zone to West Berlin with instructions to defend itself if it were stopped or attacked. Truman believed this would entail an unacceptable risk of war. He approved Ernest Bevins plan to supply the blockaded city by air. On June 25, the Allies initiated the Berlin Airlift, a campaign to deliver food, coal and other supplies using military aircraft on a massive scale. Nothing like it had ever been attempted before, and no single nation had the capability, either logistically or materially, to accomplish it. The airlift worked ground access was again granted on May 11, 1949. Nevertheless, the airlift continued for several months after that. The Berlin Airlift was one of Trumans great foreign policy successes it significantly aided his election campaign in 1948. Recognition of Israel President Truman in the Oval Office, receiving a Hanukkah Menorah from the Prime Minister of Israel, David BenGurion . To the right is Abba Eban, Ambassador of Israel to the U.S. Truman had long taken an interest in the history of the Middle East, and was sympathetic to Jews who sought to reestablish their ancient homeland in Mandatory Palestine. As a senator, he announced support for Zionism in 1943 he called for a homeland for those Jews who survived the Nazi regime. However, State Department officials were reluctant to offend the Arabs, who were opposed to the establishment of a Jewish state in the large region long populated and dominated culturally by Arabs. Secretary of Defense James Forrestal warned Truman of the importance of Saudi Arabian oil in another war Truman replied that he would decide his policy on the basis of justice, not oil. American diplomats with experience in the region were opposed, but Truman told them he had few Arabs among his constituents. Palestine was secondary to the goal of protecting the Northern Tier of Greece, Turkey, and Iran from Communism, as promised by the Truman Doctrine. Weary of both the convoluted politics of the Middle East and pressure by Jewish leaders, Truman was undecided on his policy, and skeptical about how the Jewish underdogs would handle power.Baylis, Thomas. How Israel was Won A Concise History of the ArabIsraeli Conflict , p. 55 .Holmes, David. The Faiths of the Postwar Presidents From Truman to Obama , pp. 1617 . He later cited as decisive in his recognition of the Jewish state the advice of his former business partner, Eddie Jacobson, a nonreligious Jew whom Truman absolutely trusted. Truman decided to recognize Israel over the objections of Secretary of State George Marshall, who feared it would hurt relations with the populous Arab states. Marshall believed the paramount threat to the U.S. was the Soviet Union and feared that Arab oil would be lost to the United States in the event of war he warned Truman that U.S. was playing with fire with nothing to put it out. Truman recognized the State of Israel on May 14, 1948, eleven minutes after it declared itself a nation. Of his decision to recognize the Israeli state, Truman wrote in his memoirs Hitler had been murdering Jews right and left. I saw it, and I dream about it even to this day. The Jews needed some place where they could go. It is my attitude that the American government couldnt stand idly by while the victims of Hitlers madness are not allowed to build new lives. 1948 election Dewey during a campaign tour in New York The 1948 presidential election is remembered for Trumans stunning comefrombehind victory. In the spring of 1948, Trumans public approval rating stood at 36, and the president was nearly universally regarded as incapable of winning the general election. The New Deal operatives within the party including FDRs son James tried to swing the Democratic nomination to General Dwight D. Eisenhower, a highly popular figure whose political views and party affiliation were totally unknown. Eisenhower emphatically refused to accept, and Truman outflanked opponents to his own nomination. At the 1948 Democratic National Convention, Truman attempted to unify the party with a vague civil rights plank in the party platform. His intention was to assuage the internal conflicts between the northern and southern wings of his party. Events overtook his efforts. A sharp address given by Mayor Hubert Humphrey of Minneapolis as well as the local political interests of a number of urban bosses convinced the Convention to adopt a stronger civil rights plank, which Truman approved wholeheartedly. All of Alabamas delegates, and a portion of Mississippis, walked out of the convention in protest. Unfazed, Truman delivered an aggressive acceptance speech attacking the 80th Congress, which Truman called the Do Nothing Congress, and promising to win the election and make these Republicans like it. Within two weeks of the 1948 convention Truman issued Executive Order 9981, racially integrating the U.S. Armed Services and Executive Order 9980 to integrate federal agencies. Truman took a considerable political risk in backing civil rights, and many seasoned Democrats were concerned that the loss of Dixiecrat support might destroy the Democratic Party. South Carolina Governor Strom Thurmond, a segregationist, declared his candidacy for the presidency on a Dixiecrat ticket and led a fullscale revolt of Southern states rights proponents. This rebellion on the right was matched by one on the left, led by Wallace on the Progressive Party ticket. Immediately after its first postFDR convention, the Democratic Party seemed to be disintegrating. Victory in November seemed unlikely as the party was not simply split but divided three ways. For his running mate, Truman accepted Kentucky Senator Alben W. Barkley, though he really wanted Justice William O. Douglas, who turned down the nomination. Trumans political advisors described the political scene as one unholy, confusing cacophony. They told Truman to speak directly to the people, in a personal way. Campaign manager William J. Bray said Truman took this advice, and spoke personally and passionately, sometimes even setting aside his notes to talk to Americans of everything that is in my heart and soul. The campaign was a presidential odyssey. In a personal appeal to the nation, Truman crisscrossed the U.S. by train his whistle stop speeches from the rear platform of the observation car, Ferdinand Magellan, came to represent his campaign. His combative appearances, such as those at the town square of Harrisburg, Illinois, captured the popular imagination and drew huge crowds. Six stops in Michigan drew a combined halfmillion people a full million turned out for a New York City tickertape parade. 1948 electoral vote results Truman was so widely expected to lose the 1948 election that the Chicago Tribune had printed papers with this erroneous headline when few returns were in. The large, mostly spontaneous gatherings at Trumans whistlestop events were an important sign of a change in momentum in the campaign, but this shift went virtually unnoticed by the national press corps. It continued reporting Republican Thomas Deweys apparent impending victory as a certainty. One reason for the presss inaccurate projection was that polls were conducted primarily by telephone, but many people, including much of Trumans populist base, did not yet own a telephone. This skewed the data to indicate a stronger support base for Dewey than existed. An unintended and undetected projection error may have contributed to the perception of Trumans bleak chances. The three major polling organizations stopped polling well before the November 2 election date Roper in September, and Crossley and Gallup in October thus failing to measure the period when Truman appears to have surged past Dewey. In the end, Truman held his progressive Midwestern base, won most of the Southern states despite the civil rights plank, and squeaked through with narrow victories in a few critical states, notably Ohio, California, and Illinois. The final tally showed the President had secured 303 electoral votes, Dewey 189, and Thurmond only 39. Henry Wallace got none. The defining image of the campaign came after Election Day, when an ecstatic Truman held aloft the erroneous front page of the Chicago Tribune with a huge headline proclaiming Dewey Defeats Truman. Second term Trumans second inauguration was the first ever televised nationally. His second term was grueling as his opponents controlled Congress and his policy of rollback in Korea failed. The Soviet Unions atomic bomb project progressed much faster than had been expected and they detonated their first bomb on August 29, 1949. In response, on January 7, 1953, Truman announced the detonation of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb, which was much more powerful than the Soviets atomic weapons. Korean War President Truman signing a proclamation declaring a national emergency and authorizing U.S. entry into the Korean War On June 25, 1950, Kim Ilsungs Korean Peoples Army invaded South Korea, starting the Korean War. In the early weeks of the war, the North Koreans easily pushed back their southern counterparts. Truman called for a naval blockade of Korea, only to learn that due to budget cutbacks, the U.S. Navy could not enforce such a measure. Truman promptly urged the United Nations to intervene it did, authorizing troops under the UN flag led by U.S. General Douglas MacArthur. Truman decided that he did not need formal authorization from Congress, believing that most legislators supported his position this would come back to haunt him later, when the stalemated conflict was dubbed Mr. Trumans War by legislators. However, on July 3, 1950, Truman did give Senate Majority Leader Scott W. Lucas a draft resolution titled Joint Resolution Expressing Approval of the Action Taken in Korea. Lucas said that Congress supported the use of force, that the formal resolution would pass but was unnecessary, and that the consensus in Congress was to acquiesce. Truman responded that he did not want to appear to be trying to get around Congress and use extraConstitutional powers, and added that it was up to Congress whether such a resolution should be introduced.. By August 1950, U.S. troops pouring into South Korea under UN auspices were able to stabilize the situation. Responding to criticism over readiness, Truman fired his Secretary of Defense, Louis A. Johnson, replacing him with the retired General Marshall. With UN approval, Truman decided on a rollback policy conquest of North Korea. UN forces led by General Douglas MacArthur led the counterattack, scoring a stunning surprise victory with an amphibious landing at the Battle of Inchon that nearly trapped the invaders. UN forces marched north, toward the Yalu River boundary with China, with the goal of reuniting Korea under UN auspices. However, China surprised the UN forces with a largescale invasion in November. The UN forces were forced back to below the 38th parallel, then recovered. By early 1951 the war became a fierce stalemate at about the 38th parallel where it had begun. Truman rejected MacArthurs request to attack Chinese supply bases north of the Yalu, but MacArthur promoted his plan to Republican House leader Joseph Martin, who leaked it to the press. Truman was gravely concerned that further escalation of the war might lead to open conflict with the Soviet Union, which was already supplying weapons and providing warplanes . Therefore, on April 11, 1951, Truman fired MacArthur from his commands. The dismissal of General Douglas MacArthur was among the least politically popular decisions in presidential history. Trumans approval ratings plummeted, and he faced calls for his impeachment from, among others, Senator Robert A. Taft. Fierce criticism from virtually all quarters accused Truman of refusing to shoulder the blame for a war gone sour and blaming his generals instead. Others, including Eleanor Roosevelt, supported and applauded Trumans decision. MacArthur meanwhile returned to the U.S. to a heros welcome, and addressed a joint session of Congress, a speech the President called a bunch of damn bullshit. The war remained a frustrating stalemate for two years, with over 30,000 Americans killed, until an armistice ended the fighting in 1953. In February 1952, Trumans approval mark stood at 22 according to Gallup polls, which is the alltime lowest approval mark for an active American president, though it was matched by Richard Nixon in 1974.Presidential Job Approval for Richard Nixon at the American Presidency Project. Worldwide defense Truman and Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru during Nehrus visit to the United States, October 1949 The escalation of the Cold War was highlighted by Trumans approval of NSC68, a secret statement of foreign policy. It called for tripling the defense budget, and the globalization and militarization of containment policy whereby the U.S. and its NATO allies would respond militarily to actual Soviet expansion. The document was drafted by Paul Nitze, who consulted State and Defense officials it was formally approved by President Truman as official national strategy after the war began in Korea. It called for partial mobilization of the U.S. economy to build armaments faster than the Soviets. The plan called for strengthening Europe, weakening the Soviet Union, and for building up the U.S. both militarily and economically. Early in Trumans second term, his former Secretary of Defense Forrestal died soon after retiring. Forrestal had become exhausted through years of hard labor during and after the war, and had begun to suffer depression. He retired in March 1949 soon after, he was hospitalized but committed suicide in May. Truman was a strong supporter of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , which established a formal peacetime military alliance with Canada and democratic European nations that had not fallen under Soviet control following World War II. The treaty establishing it was widely popular and easily passed the Senate in 1949 Truman appointed General Eisenhower as commander. NATOs goals were to contain Soviet expansion in Europe and to send a clear message to communist leaders that the worlds democracies were willing and able to build new security structures in support of democratic ideals. The U.S., Britain, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Norway, Denmark, Portugal, Iceland, and Canada were the original treaty signatories. The alliance resulted in the Soviets establishing a similar alliance, called the Warsaw Pact. General Marshall was Trumans principal adviser on foreign policy matters, influencing such decisions as the U.S. choice against offering direct military aid to Chiang Kaishek and his Nationalist Chinese forces in the Chinese Civil War against their communist opponents. Marshalls opinion was contrary to the counsel of almost all of Trumans other advisers Marshall thought propping up Chiangs forces would drain U.S. resources that were needed in Europe to deter the Soviets. When the communists took control of the mainland, establishing the Peoples Republic of China and driving the Nationalists to Taiwan, Truman would have been willing to maintain some relationship between the U.S. and the new government but Mao was unwilling. On June 27, 1950, after the outbreak of fighting in Korea, Truman ordered the U.S. Navys Seventh Fleet into the Taiwan Strait to prevent further conflict between the communist government on the China mainland and the Republic of China on Taiwan. Soviet espionage and McCarthyism In August 1948, Whittaker Chambers, a former spy for the Soviets and a senior editor at Time magazine, testified before the House UnAmerican Activities Committee . He said that an underground communist network had been working within the U.S. government since the 1930s, of which Chambers had been a member, along with Alger Hiss, until recently a senior State Department official. Although Hiss denied the allegations, he was convicted in January 1950 for perjury for denials under oath. The Soviet Unions success in exploding an atomic weapon in 1949 and the fall of the nationalist Chinese the same year led many Americans to conclude that subversion by Soviet spies was responsible, and to demand that communists be rooted out from the government and other places of influence. However, Truman did not fully share such opinions. He famously called the Hiss trial a red herring, and the Justice Department was moving to indict Chambers instead of Hiss for perjury. Wisconsin Senator McCarthy accused the State Department of harboring communists, and rode the controversy to political fame. Charges that Soviet agents had infiltrated the government were believed by 78 of the people in 1946, and became a major campaign issue for Eisenhower in 1952. Truman was reluctant to take a more radical stance because he feared that the full disclosure of the extent of the communist infiltration would reflect badly on the Democratic Party. It was a time of the Red Scare. In a 1956 interview, Truman denied that Alger Hiss had ever been a communist, a full six years after Hiss conviction for perjury on this topic. In 1949, Truman described American communist leaders, whom his administration was prosecuting, as traitors, but in 1950 he vetoed the McCarran Internal Security Act. It was passed over his veto. Truman would later state in private conversations with friends that his creation of a loyalty program had been a terrible mistake. White House renovations assassination attempt View of the interior shell of the White House during renovation in 1950 In 1948, Truman ordered an addition to the exterior of the White House a secondfloor balcony in the south portico, which came to be known as the Truman Balcony . The addition was unpopular. Some said it spoiled the appearance of the south facade, but it gave the First Family more living space. The work uncovered structural faults that led engineering experts to conclude that the building, much of it over 130 years old, was in a dangerously dilapidated condition. That August, a section of floor collapsed, and Trumans bedroom and bathroom were closed as unsafe. No public announcement about the serious structural problems of the White House was made until after the 1948 election had been won. By then Truman had been informed that his new balcony was the only part of the building that was sound. The Truman family moved into nearby Blair House during the renovations. As the newer West Wing, including the Oval Office, remained open, Truman walked to and from his work across the street each morning and afternoon. In due course, the decision was made to demolish and rebuild the whole interior of the main White House, as well as excavate new basement levels and underpin the foundations. The famous exterior of the structure was buttressed and retained while the extensive renovations proceeded inside. The work lasted from December 1949 until March 1952. On November 1, 1950, Puerto Rican nationalists Griselio Torresola and Oscar Collazo attempted to assassinate Truman at Blair House. The attack drew new attention to security concerns surrounding Trumans residence at Blair House. He had jumped up from a nap, and was watching the gunfight from his open bedroom window until Secret Service agents shouted at him to take cover. On the street outside the residence, Torresola mortally wounded a White House policeman, Leslie Coffelt. Before he died, the officer shot and killed Torresola. Collazo was wounded and stopped before he entered the house. He was found guilty of murder and sentenced to death in 1952. Truman commuted his sentence to life in prison. To try to settle the question of Puerto Rican independence, Truman allowed a plebiscite in Puerto Rico in 1952 to determine the status of its relationship to the U.S. Nearly 82 of the people voted in favor of a new constitution for the Estado Libre Asociado, a continued associated free state.. Steel and coal strikes In response to a labormanagement impasse arising from bitter disagreements over wage and price controls, Truman instructed his Secretary of Commerce, Charles W. Sawyer, to take control of a number of the nations steel mills in April 1952. Truman cited his authority as Commander in Chief and the need to maintain an uninterrupted supply of steel for munitions for the war in Korea. The Supreme Court found Trumans actions unconstitutional, however, and reversed the order in a major separationofpowers decision, Youngstown Sheet Tube Co. v. Sawyer . The 6 3 decision, which held that Trumans assertion of authority was too vague and was not rooted in any legislative action by Congress, was delivered by a Court composed entirely of Justices appointed by either Truman or Roosevelt. The high courts reversal of Trumans order was one of the notable defeats of his presidency. Scandals and controversies President Harry S. Truman in an official portrait. In 1950, the Senate, led by Estes Kefauver, investigated numerous charges of corruption among senior administration officials, some of whom received fur coats and deep freezers in exchange for favors. A large number of employees of the Internal Revenue Bureau were accepting bribes 166 employees either resigned or were fired in 1950, with many soon facing indictment. When Attorney General J. Howard McGrath fired the special prosecutor in early 1952 for being too zealous, Truman fired McGrath. Truman submitted a reorganization plan to reform the IRB Congress passed it, but the corruption was a major issue in the 1952 presidential election. On December 6, 1950, Washington Post music critic Paul Hume wrote a critical review of a concert by the presidents daughter Margaret Truman Harry Truman wrote a scathing response Truman was criticized by many for the letter. However, he pointed out that he wrote it as a loving father and not as the president. In 1951, William M. Boyle, Trumans longtime friend and chairman of the Democratic National Committee, was forced to resign after being charged with financial corruption.Eleonora W. Schoenebaum, ed. Political Profiles The Truman Years pp 4849. Civil rights A 1947 report by the Truman administration titled To Secure These Rights presented a detailed tenpoint agenda of civil rights reforms. In February 1948, the president submitted a civil rights agenda to Congress that proposed creating several federal offices devoted to issues such as voting rights and fair employment practices. This provoked a storm of criticism from southern Democrats in the runup to the national nominating convention, but Truman refused to compromise, saying My forebears were Confederates... but my very stomach turned over when I had learned that Negro soldiers, just back from overseas, were being dumped out of Army trucks in Mississippi and beaten. Tales of the abuse, violence, and persecution suffered by many AfricanAmerican veterans upon their return from World War II infuriated Truman, and were a major factor in his decision to issue Executive Order 9981, in July 1948, requiring equal opportunity in the Armed Forces. In the early 1950s after several years of planning, recommendations and revisions between Truman, the Committee on Equality of Treatment and Opportunity and the various branches of the military, the services became racially integrated. Another executive order, also in 1948, made it illegal to discriminate against persons applying for civil service positions based on race. A third, in 1951, established the Committee on Government Contract Compliance . This committee ensured defense contractors did not discriminate because of race. In 1950 he vetoed the McCarran Internal Security Act. It was passed over his veto. Administration and cabinet International trips Truman made five international trips during his presidency 1952 election From left President Harry S. Truman, Vice Presidential nominee, Alabama Senator John J. Sparkman and presidential nominee, Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson. Oval Office, 1952 In 1951, the U.S. ratified the 22nd Amendment, making a president ineligible for election to a third term or for election to a second full term after serving more than two remaining years of a term of a previously elected president. The latter clause would have applied to Trumans situation in 1952 except that a grandfather clause in the amendment explicitly excluded the amendment from applying to the incumbent president. At the time of the 1952 New Hampshire primary, no candidate had won Trumans backing. His first choice, Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson, had declined to run Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson had also turned Truman down, Vice President Barkley was considered too old, and Truman distrusted and disliked Senator Kefauver, who had made a name for himself by his investigations of the Truman administration scandals. Truman had hoped to recruit General Eisenhower as a Democratic candidate, but found him more interested in seeking the Republican nomination. Accordingly, Truman let his name be entered in the New Hampshire primary by supporters. The highly unpopular Truman was handily defeated by Kefauver 18 days later the president announced he would not seek a second full term. Truman was eventually able to persuade Stevenson to run, and the governor gained the nomination at the 1952 Democratic National Convention. Eisenhower gained the Republican nomination, with Senator Nixon as his running mate, and campaigned against what he denounced as Trumans failures Korea, Communism and Corruption. He pledged to clean up the mess in Washington, and promised to go to Korea. Eisenhower defeated Stevenson decisively in the general election, ending 20 years of Democratic presidents. While Truman and Eisenhower had previously been on good terms, Truman felt annoyed that Eisenhower did not denounce Joseph McCarthy during the campaign. Similarly, Eisenhower was outraged when Truman accused the former general of disregarding sinister forces... AntiSemitism, antiCatholicism, and antiforeignism within the Republican Party. Postpresidency Official White House portrait of Harry S. Truman by Greta Kempton Upon leaving the presidency, Truman returned to Independence, Missouri, to live at the Wallace home he and Bess had shared for years with her mother. Once out of office, Truman quickly decided that he did not wish to be on any corporate payroll, believing that taking advantage of such financial opportunities would diminish the integrity of the nations highest office. He also turned down numerous offers for commercial endorsements. Since his earlier business ventures had proved unsuccessful, he had no personal savings. As a result, he faced financial challenges. Once Truman left the White House, his only income was his old army pension 112.56 per month. Former members of Congress and the federal courts received a federal retirement package President Truman himself ensured that former servants of the executive branch of government received similar support. In 1953, however, there was no such benefit package for former presidents, and he received no pension for his Senate service. Truman and his wife Bess attend the signing of the Medicare Bill on July 30, 1965, by President Lyndon B. Johnson Truman took out a personal loan from a Missouri bank shortly after leaving office, and then found a lucrative book deal for his memoirs. For the memoirs, Truman received only a flat payment of 670,000, and had to pay twothirds of that in tax he calculated he got 37,000 after he paid his assistants. However, the memoirs were a commercial and critical success they were published in two volumes in 1955 and 1956 by Doubleday and Hodder Stoughton Memoirs by Harry S. Truman Year of Decisions and Memoirs by Harry S. Truman Years of Trial and Hope . The former president was quoted in 1957 as saying to thenHouse Majority Leader John McCormack, Had it not been for the fact that I was able to sell some property that my brother, sister, and I inherited from our mother, I would practically be on relief, but with the sale of that property I am not financially embarrassed. The following year, Congress passed the Former Presidents Act, offering a 25,000 yearly pension to each former president, and it is likely that Trumans financial status played a role in the laws enactment. The one other living former president at the time, Herbert Hoover, also took the pension, even though he did not need the money reportedly, he did so to avoid embarrassing Truman. Trumans predecessor, Franklin D. Roosevelt, had organized his own presidential library, but legislation to enable future presidents to do something similar had not been enacted. Truman worked to garner private donations to build a presidential library, which he donated to the federal government to maintain and operate a practice adopted by his successors. He testified before Congress to have money appropriated to have presidential papers copied and organized, and was proud of the bills passage in 1957. Max Skidmore, in his book on the life of former presidents, noted that Truman was a wellread man, especially in history. Skidmore added that the presidential papers legislation and the founding of his library was the culmination of his interest in history. Together they constitute an enormous contribution to the United States one of the greatest of any former president. Truman supported Adlai Stevensons second bid for the White House in 1956, although he had initially favored Democratic Governor W. Averell Harriman of New York. He continued to campaign for Democratic senatorial candidates for many years. Upon turning 80 in 1964, Truman was feted in Washington, and addressed the Senate, availing himself of a new rule that allowed former presidents to be granted privilege of the floor. After a fall in his home in late 1964, his physical condition declined. In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Medicare bill at the Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum and gave the first two Medicare cards to Truman and his wife Bess to honor the former presidents fight for government health care while in office. Death Wreath at Trumans casket on the day of his funeral, December 27, 1972, Independence, Missouri On December 5, 1972, Truman was admitted to Kansas Citys Research Hospital and Medical Center with lung congestion from pneumonia. He developed multiple organ failure and died at 750am on December 26 at the age of 88. Bess Truman opted for a simple private service at the library rather than a state funeral in Washington. A week after the funeral, foreign dignitaries and Washington officials attended a memorial service at Washington National Cathedral. Bess died in 1982 they are buried at the Harry S. Truman Library and Museum in Independence. Tributes and legacy Biographer Robert Donovan has tried to capture Trumans personality Legacy Truman poses in 1959 at the recreation of the Truman Oval Office at the Truman Library in 1959, with the famous The Buck Stops Here sign on his desk. Citing continuing divisions within the Democratic Party, the ongoing Cold War, and the boom and bust cycle, journalist Samuel Lubell in 1952 stated After seven years of Trumans hectic, even furious, activity the nation seemed to be about on the same general spot as when he first came to office... Nowhere in the whole Truman record can one point to a single, decisive breakthrough... All his skills and energies and he was among our hardestworking Presidents were directed to standing still. When he left office in 1953, Truman was one of the most unpopular chief executives in history. His job approval rating of 22 in the Gallup Poll of February 1952 was lower than Richard Nixons 24 in August 1974, the month Nixon resigned, but matched by Nixons alltime low in January 1974.Presidential Job Approval for Richard Nixon at the American Presidency Project. American public feeling towards Truman grew steadily warmer with the passing years as early as 1962, a poll of 75 historians conducted by Arthur M. Schlesinger, Sr. ranked Truman among the near great presidents. The period following his death consolidated a partial rehabilitation of his legacy among both historians and members of the public. Truman died when the nation was consumed with crises in Vietnam and Watergate, and his death brought a new wave of attention to his political career. In the early and mid1970s, Truman captured the popular imagination much as he had in 1948, this time emerging as a kind of political folk hero, a president who was thought to exemplify an integrity and accountability many observers felt was lacking in the Nixon White House. This public reassessment of Truman was aided by the popularity of a book of reminiscences Truman had recounted to journalist Merle Miller beginning in 1961, with the agreement that they would not be published until after Trumans death. Truman has had his latterday critics as well. After a review of information available to Truman about the presence of espionage activities in the U.S. government, Democratic Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan concluded that Truman was almost wilfully obtuse concerning the danger of American communism. In 2010, historian Alonzo Hamby concluded that Harry Truman remains a controversial president. However, since leaving office, Truman has fared well in polls ranking the presidents. He has never been listed lower than ninth, and was ranked fifth in a CSPAN poll in 2009. The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 caused Truman advocates to claim vindication for his decisions in the postwar period. According to Truman biographer Robert Dallek, His contribution to victory in the cold war without a devastating nuclear conflict elevated him to the stature of a great or neargreat president. The 1992 publication of David McCulloughs favorable biography of Truman further cemented the view of Truman as a highly regarded Chief Executive. According to historian Donald R. McCoy in his book on the Truman presidency Sites and honors In 1953, Truman received the Solomon Bublick Award of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. In 1956, Truman traveled to Europe with his wife. In England, he met with Churchill and received an honorary Doctor of Civil Law degree from Oxford University. Across Britain he was hailed Londons Daily Telegraph characterized Truman as the Living and kicking symbol of everything that everybody likes best about the United States. In 1959, he was given a 50year award by the Masons, recognizing his longstanding involvement he was initiated on February 9, 1909, into the Belton Masonic Lodge in Missouri. In 1911, he helped establish the Grandview Lodge, and he served as its first Worshipful Master. In September 1940, during his Senate reelection campaign, Truman was elected Grand Master of the Missouri Grand Lodge of Freemasonry Truman said later that the Masonic election assured his victory in the general election. In 1945, he was made a 33 Sovereign Grand Inspector General and an Honorary Member of the supreme council at the Supreme Council A.A.S.R. Southern Jurisdiction Headquarters in Washington D.C. Truman was also a member of Sons of the American Revolution and a cardcarrying member of the Sons of Confederate Veterans. Two of his relatives were Confederate soldiers. In 1975, the Truman Scholarship was created as a federal program to honor U.S. college students who exemplified dedication to public service and leadership in public policy. In 2004, the President Harry S. Truman Fellowship in National Security Science and Engineering was created as a distinguished postdoctoral threeyear appointment at Sandia National Laboratories. In 2001, the University of Missouri established the Harry S. Truman School of Public Affairs to advance the study and practice of governance. The University of Missouris Missouri Tigers athletic programs have an official mascot named Truman the Tiger. On July 1, 1996, Northeast Missouri State University became Truman State University to mark its transformation from a teachers college to a highly selective liberal arts university and to honor the only Missourian to become president. A member institution of the City Colleges of Chicago, Harry S Truman College in Chicago, Illinois, is named in his honor for his dedication to public colleges and universities. In 2000, the headquarters for the State Department, built in the 1930s but never officially named, was dedicated as the Harry S Truman Building. Despite Trumans attempt to curtail the naval carrier arm, which led to the 1949 Revolt of the Admirals, an aircraft carrier is named after him. The was christened on September 7, 1996. The 129th Field Artillery Regiment is designated Trumans Own in recognition of Trumans service as commander of its D Battery during World War I. In 1984, Truman was posthumously awarded the United States Congressional Gold Medal. In 1991, he was inducted into the Hall of Famous Missourians, and a bronze bust depicting him is on permanent display in the rotunda of the Missouri State Capitol. Other sites associated with Truman include Harry S. Truman National Historic Site includes the Wallace House at 219 N. Delaware in Independence and the family farmhouse at Grandview, Missouri . Harry S Truman Birthplace State Historic Site is the house where Truman was born and spent 11 months in Lamar, Missouri. Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum The Presidential library in Independence Harry S. Truman Little White House Trumans winter getaway at Key West, Florida See also Electoral history of Harry S. Truman Truman Truman Day List of Presidents of the United States Notes References Bibliography Books . Margolies, Daniel S. ed. A Companion to Harry S. Truman 614pp emphasis on historiography see Sean J. Savage, Truman in Historical, Popular, and Political Memory, pp 9 25. excerpt Primary sources online online v 2 Journals reprinted in Time The Washington Post New York Times Harry S. Truman Library Museum Originally published in the Independence Examiner , Truman Centennial Edition. Online sources searches run from page, select research categories then check court type and nominating president, then select U.S. District Courts and also Harry Truman. External links Official Harry S. Truman Library Museum Harry S Truman National Historic Site White House biography Media coverage Other Harry S. Truman A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Federal Bureau of Investigation Records The Vault Harry S. Truman Essays on Harry S. Truman, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs The Presidents Truman , an American Experience documentary Life Portrait of Harry S. Truman, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , October 18, 1999 Harry S. Truman Personal Manuscripts Category1884 births Category1972 deaths Category20thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican anticommunists CategoryAmerican memoirists CategoryAmerican military personnel of World War I CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryAmerican people of the Korean War CategoryAmerican people of Cornish descent CategoryAmerican Presbyterians CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryAtchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway people CategoryCongressional Gold Medal recipients CategoryCounty executives of Jackson County, Missouri CategoryDeaths from multiple organ failure CategoryDeaths from pneumonia CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryDemocratic Party United States Senators CategoryDemocratic Party vice presidential nominees CategoryDemocratic Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategoryFranklin D. Roosevelt administration cabinet members CategoryHaberdashers CategoryInfectious disease deaths in Missouri CategoryMasonic Grand Masters CategoryMilitary personnel from Missouri CategoryMissouri Democrats CategoryNational Guard of the United States officers CategoryPendergast era CategoryPeople from Belton, Missouri CategoryPeople from Grandview, Missouri CategoryPeople from Harrisonville, Missouri CategoryPeople from Lamar, Missouri CategoryPoliticians from Independence, Missouri CategoryPresidency of Harry S. Truman CategoryPresidents of the United States CategorySolomon Bublick Award recipients CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryTruman family CategoryUnited States Army colonels CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1948 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1952 CategoryUnited States Senators from Missouri CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1944 CategoryUniversity of Missouri Kansas City alumni CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryWilliam Chrisman High School alumni CategoryWorld War II political leaders CategoryWriters fromMissouri
Gerald Rudolph Ford Jr. was an American politician who served as the 38th President of the United States from August 1974 to January 1977, following the resignation of Richard Nixon. Prior to this he served eight months as the 40th Vice President of the United States, following the resignation of Spiro Agnew. He was the first person appointed to the vice presidency under the terms of the 25th Amendment, and consequently the only person to have served as both Vice President and President of the United States without being elected to executive office. Before his appointment to the vice presidency, Ford served 25 years as U.S. Representative from Michigans 5th congressional district, the final nine of them as the House Minority Leader. As President, Ford signed the Helsinki Accords, marking a move toward dtente in the Cold War. With the conquest of South Vietnam by North Vietnam nine months into his presidency, U.S. involvement in Vietnam essentially ended. Domestically, Ford presided over the worst economy in the four decades since the Great Depression, with growing inflation and a recession during his tenure. One of his most controversial acts was to grant a presidential pardon to President Richard Nixon for his role in the Watergate scandal. During Fords presidency, foreign policy was characterized in procedural terms by the increased role Congress began to play, and by the corresponding curb on the powers of the President. In the Republican presidential primary campaign of 1976, Ford defeated former California Governor Ronald Reagan for the Republican nomination. He narrowly lost the presidential election to the Democratic challenger, former Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter. Following his years as President, Ford remained active in the Republican Party. After experiencing health problems, he died at home on December 26, 2006. Ford lived longer than any other U.S. president 93 years and 165 days while his 895day presidency is the shortest of all presidents who did not die in office. He is the most recent Vice President to become President as a result of succession to a midterm vacancy. Early life Ford was born Leslie Lynch King Jr. on July 14, 1913, at 3202 Woolworth Avenue in Omaha, Nebraska, where his parents lived with his paternal grandparents. His mother was Dorothy Ayer Gardner and his father was Leslie Lynch King Sr., a wool trader and a son of prominent banker Charles Henry King and Martha Alicia King . Dorothy separated from King just sixteen days after her sons birth. She took her son with her to the Oak Park, Illinois, home of her sister Tannisse and brotherinlaw, Clarence Haskins James. From there, she moved to the home of her parents, Levi Addison Gardner and Adele Augusta Ayer, in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Dorothy and King divorced in December 1913, and she gained full custody of her son. Fords paternal grandfather Charles Henry King paid child support until shortly before his death in 1930. Leslie Lynch King Jr. in 1916 Ford later said his biological father had a history of hitting his mother. James M. Cannon, a member of the Ford administration, wrote in a biography of Ford that the Kings separation and divorce were sparked when, a few days after Fords birth, Leslie King took a butcher knife and threatened to kill his wife, his infant son, and Fords nursemaid. Ford later told confidantes that his father had first hit his mother on their honeymoon for smiling at another man. After two and a half years with her parents, on February 1, 1916, Dorothy married Gerald Rudolff Ford, a salesman in a familyowned paint and varnish company. They then called her son Gerald Rudolff Ford Jr. The future president was never formally adopted, and did not legally change his name until December 3, 1935 he also used a more conventional spelling of his middle name. He was raised in Grand Rapids with his three halfbrothers from his mothers second marriage Thomas Gardner Tom Ford , Richard Addison Dick Ford , and James Francis Jim Ford . Ford also had three halfsiblings from the second marriage of Leslie King, Sr., his biological father Marjorie King , Leslie Henry King , and Patricia Jane King . They never saw one another as children and he did not know them at all. Ford was not aware of his biological father until he was 17, when his parents told him about the circumstances of his birth. That year his biological father, whom Ford described as a carefree, welltodo man who didnt really give a damn about the hopes and dreams of his firstborn son, approached Ford while he was waiting tables in a Grand Rapids restaurant. The two maintained a sporadic contact until Leslie King, Sr.s death in 1941. Ford said, My stepfather was a magnificent person and my mother equally wonderful. So I couldnt have written a better prescription for a superb family upbringing. Eagle Scout Gerald Ford in 1929 Michigan Governor Fred W. Green at far left, holding hat Ford as a center on the University of Michigan football team, 1933 Ford was involved in the Boy Scouts of America, and earned that programs highest rank, Eagle Scout. He is the only Eagle Scout to have ascended to the U.S. Presidency. Ford attended Grand Rapids South High School, where he was a star athlete and captain of the football team. In 1930, he was selected to the AllCity team of the Grand Rapids City League. He also attracted the attention of college recruiters. College and law school Attending the University of Michigan as an undergraduate, Ford became a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity and washed dishes at his fraternity house to earn money for college expenses. Ford played center, linebacker, and long snapper for the schools football team, and helped the Wolverines in two undefeated seasons and national titles in 1932 and 1933. The team suffered a steep decline in his 1934 senior year, however, winning only one game. Ford was the teams star nonetheless. After a game during which Michigan held heavily favored Minnesota to a scoreless tie in the first half, assistant coach Bennie Oosterbaan later said, When I walked into the dressing room at halftime, I had tears in my eyes I was so proud of them. Ford and Cedric Sweet played their hearts out. They were everywhere on defense. Ford later recalled, During 25 years in the roughandtumble world of politics, I often thought of the experiences before, during, and after that game in 1934. Remembering them has helped me many times to face a tough situation, take action, and make every effort possible despite adverse odds. His teammates later voted Ford their most valuable player, with one assistant coach noting, They felt Jerry was one guy who would stay and fight in a losing cause. During Fords senior year, a controversy developed when the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets refused to play a scheduled game if a black player named Willis Ward took the field. Even after protests from students, players and alumni, university officials opted to keep Ward out of the game. Ford was Wards best friend on the team and they roomed together while on road trips. Ford reportedly threatened to quit the team in response to the universitys decision, but eventually agreed to play against Georgia Tech when Ward personally asked him to play. In 1934, Ford was selected for the Eastern Team on the Shriners East West Shrine Game at San Francisco , played on January 1, 1935. As part of the 1935 Collegiate AllStar football team, Ford played against the Chicago Bears in the Chicago College AllStar Game at Soldier Field. In honor of his athletic accomplishments and his later political career, the University of Michigan retired Fords No. 48 jersey in 1994. With the blessing of the Ford family, it was placed back into circulation in 2012 as part of the Michigan Football Legends program and issued to sophomore linebacker Desmond Morgan before a home game against Illinois on October 13. Ford remained interested in football and his school throughout life, occasionally attending games. Ford also visited with players and coaches during practices, at one point asking to join the players in the huddle. Ford often had the Naval band play the University of Michigan fight song, The Victors , before state events instead of Hail to the Chief . Following his graduation in 1935 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics, Ford turned down contract offers from the Detroit Lions and Green Bay Packers of the National Football League. Instead, in September 1935 he took a job as the boxing coach and assistant varsity football coach at Yale University, and applied to its law school. Ford hoped to attend Yales law school beginning in 1935. Yale officials at first denied his admission to the law school because of his fulltime coaching responsibilities. He spent the summer of 1937 as a student at the University of Michigan Law School and was eventually admitted in the spring of 1938 to Yale Law School. Ford earned his LL.B. degree in 1941 , graduating in the top 25 percent of his class. While attending Yale Law School, Ford joined a group of students led by R. Douglas Stuart Jr., and signed a petition to enforce the 1939 Neutrality Act. The petition was circulated nationally and was the inspiration for the America First Committee, a group determined to keep the U.S. out of World War II. p. 7 In the summer of 1940 he worked in Wendell Willkies presidential campaign. Ford graduated from law school in 1941 and was admitted to the Michigan bar shortly thereafter. In May 1941, he opened a Grand Rapids law practice with a friend, Philip W. Buchen, who would later serve as Fords White House counsel. U.S. Naval Reserve The Gunnery officers of . Ford is second from the right, in the front row. Ford responded to the December 7, 1941, attack on Pearl Harbor by enlisting in the navy. He received a commission as ensign in the U.S. Naval Reserve on April 13, 1942. On April 20, he reported for active duty to the V5 instructor school at Annapolis, Maryland. After one month of training, he went to Navy Preflight School in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, where he was one of 83 instructors and taught elementary navigation skills, ordnance, gunnery, first aid, and military drill. In addition, he coached in all nine sports that were offered, but mostly in swimming, boxing and football. During the year he was at the Preflight School, he was promoted to Lieutenant, Junior Grade, on June 2, 1942, and to lieutenant, in March 1943. Sea duty Navy pilots in forward elevator well playing basketball. Jumper at left is Gerald R. Ford, mid1944 After applying for sea duty, Ford was sent in May 1943 to the precommissioning detachment for the new aircraft carrier , at New York Shipbuilding Corporation, Camden, New Jersey. From the ships commissioning on June 17, 1943, until the end of December 1944, Ford served as the assistant navigator, Athletic Officer, and antiaircraft battery officer on board the Monterey . While he was on board, the carrier participated in many actions in the Pacific Theater with the Third and Fifth Fleets in late 1943 and 1944. In 1943, the carrier helped secure Makin Island in the Gilberts, and participated in carrier strikes against Kavieng, New Ireland in 1943. During the spring of 1944, the Monterey supported landings at Kwajalein and Eniwetok and participated in carrier strikes in the Marianas, Western Carolines, and northern New Guinea, as well as in the Battle of the Philippine Sea. After an overhaul, from September to November 1944, aircraft from the Monterey launched strikes against Wake Island, participated in strikes in the Philippines and Ryukyus, and supported the landings at Leyte and Mindoro. Ford in Navy uniform, 1945 Although the ship was not damaged by Japanese forces, the Monterey was one of several ships damaged by the typhoon that hit Admiral William Halseys Third Fleet on December 18 19, 1944. The Third Fleet lost three destroyers and over 800 men during the typhoon. The Monterey was damaged by a fire, which was started by several of the ships aircraft tearing loose from their cables and colliding on the hangar deck. During the storm, Ford narrowly avoided becoming a casualty himself. As he was going to his battle station on the bridge of the ship in the early morning of December 18, the ship rolled twentyfive degrees, which caused Ford to lose his footing and slide toward the edge of the deck. The twoinch steel ridge around the edge of the carrier slowed him enough so he could roll, and he twisted into the catwalk below the deck. As he later stated, I was lucky I could have easily gone overboard. Ford, serving as General Quarters Officer of the Deck, was ordered to go below to assess the raging fire. He did so safely, and reported his findings back to the ships commanding officer, Captain Stuart Ingersoll. The ships crew was able to contain the fire, and the ship got underway again. After the fire, the Monterey was declared unfit for service, and the crippled carrier reached Ulithi on December 21 before continuing across the Pacific to Bremerton, Washington where it underwent repairs. On December 24, 1944, at Ulithi, Ford was detached from the ship and sent to the Navy PreFlight School at Saint Marys College of California, where he was assigned to the Athletic Department until April 1945. One of his duties was to coach football. From the end of April 1945 to January 1946, he was on the staff of the Naval Reserve Training Command, Naval Air Station, Glenview, Illinois, as the Staff Physical and Military Training Officer. On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander. Ford received the following military awards the American Campaign Medal, the AsiaticPacific Campaign Medal with nine bronze stars , the Philippine Liberation Medal with two bronze stars , and the World War II Victory Medal. Postwar In January 1946, Ford was sent to the Separation Center, Great Lakes to be processed out. He was released from active duty under honorable conditions on February 23, 1946. On June 28, 1946, the Secretary of the Navy accepted Fords resignation from the Naval Reserve. Ford remained in the inactive Naval Reserve until 1963. Marriage and children The Fords on their wedding day, October 15, 1948 On October 15, 1948, at Grace Episcopal Church in Grand Rapids, Ford married Elizabeth Bloomer Warren , a department store fashion consultant. Warren had been a John Robert Powers fashion model and a dancer in the auxiliary troupe of the Martha Graham Dance Company. She had previously been married to and divorced from William G. Warren. At the time of his engagement, Ford was campaigning for what would be his first of thirteen terms as a member of the United States House of Representatives. The wedding was delayed until shortly before the elections because, as The New York Times reported in a 1974 profile of Betty Ford, Jerry was running for Congress and wasnt sure how voters might feel about his marrying a divorced exdancer. The couple had four children Michael Gerald, born in 1949 John Gardner, known as Jack, born in 1951 Steven Meigs, born in 1956 Susan Elizabeth, born in 1957 House of Representatives A billboard for Fords 1948 Congressional Campaign After returning to Grand Rapids in 1946, Ford became active in local Republican politics, and supporters urged him to take on Bartel J. Jonkman, the incumbent Republican congressman. Military service had changed his view of the world. I came back a converted internationalist, Ford wrote, and of course our congressman at that time was an avowed, dedicated isolationist. And I thought he ought to be replaced. Nobody thought I could win. I ended up winning two to one. During his first campaign in 1948, Ford visited voters at their doorsteps and as they left the factories where they worked. Ford also visited local farms where, in one instance, a wager resulted in Ford spending two weeks milking cows following his election victory. Ford was a member of the House of Representatives for 25 years, holding the Grand Rapids congressional district seat from 1949 to 1973. It was a tenure largely notable for its modesty. As an editorial in The New York Times described him, Ford saw himself as a negotiator and a reconciler, and the record shows it he did not write a single piece of major legislation in his entire career. Appointed to the House Appropriations Committee two years after being elected, he was a prominent member of the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee. Ford described his philosophy as a moderate in domestic affairs, an internationalist in foreign affairs, and a conservative in fiscal policy. Ford was known to his colleagues in the House as a Congressmans Congressman. Celebrating the life of President Gerald R. Ford on what would have been his 96th birthday, H.R. 409, 111th Congress, 1st Session . In the early 1950s, Ford declined offers to run for either the Senate or the Michigan governorship. Rather, his ambition was to become Speaker of the House, which he called the ultimate achievement. To sit up there and be the head honcho of 434 other people and have the responsibility, aside from the achievement, of trying to run the greatest legislative body in the history of mankind ... I think I got that ambition within a year or two after I was in the House of Representatives. Warren Commission The Warren Commission presents its report to President Johnson On November 29, 1963, Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Ford to the Warren Commission, a special task force set up to investigate the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. Ford was assigned to prepare a biography of Lee Harvey Oswald, the accused assassin. According to a 1963 FBI memo released in 2008, Ford was in contact with the FBI throughout his time on the Warren Commission and relayed information to the deputy director, Cartha DeLoach, about the panels activities. In the preface to his book, A Presidential Legacy and The Warren Commission , Ford defended the work of the commission and reiterated his support of its conclusions. House Minority Leader Ford meets with President Richard Nixon as House Minority Leader. Congressman Gerald Ford, MSFC director Wernher von Braun, Congressman George H. Mahon, and NASA Administrator James E. Webb visit the Marshall Space Flight Center for a briefing on the Saturn program, 1964. In 1964, Lyndon Johnson led a landslide victory for his party, securing another term as president and taking 36 seats from Republicans in the House of Representatives. Following the election, members of the Republican caucus looked to select a new Minority Leader. Three members approached Ford to see if he would be willing to serve after consulting with his family, he agreed. After a closely contested election, Ford was chosen to replace Charles Halleck of Indiana as Minority Leader. With a Democrat majority in both the House of Representatives and the Senate, the Johnson Administration proposed and passed a series of programs that was called by Johnson the Great Society. During the first session of the Eightyninth Congress alone, the Johnson Administration submitted 87 bills to Congress, and Johnson signed 84, or 96, arguably the most successful legislative agenda in Congressional history.Unger, Irwin, 1996 The Best of Intentions the triumphs and failures of the Great Society under Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon Doubleday, p. 104. In 1966, criticism over the Johnson Administrations handling of the Vietnam War began to grow, with Ford and Congressional Republicans expressing concern that the United States was not doing what was necessary to win the war. Public sentiment also began to move against Johnson, and the 1966 midterm elections saw a 47seat swing in favor of the Republicans. This was not enough to give Republicans a majority in the House, but the victory gave Ford the opportunity to prevent the passage of further Great Society programs. Fords private criticism of the Vietnam War became public following a speech from the floor of the House, in which he questioned whether the White House had a clear plan to bring the war to a successful conclusion. The speech angered President Johnson, who accused Ford of having played too much football without a helmet. As Minority Leader in the House, Ford appeared in a popular series of televised press conferences with Illinois Senator Everett Dirksen, in which they proposed Republican alternatives to Johnsons policies. Many in the press jokingly called this The Ev and Jerry Show. Johnson said at the time, Jerry Ford is so dumb he cant fart and chew gum at the same time. The press, used to sanitizing Johnsons salty language, reported this as Gerald Ford cant walk and chew gum at the same time. After President Nixon was elected in November 1968, Fords role shifted to being an advocate for the White House agenda. Congress passed several of Nixons proposals, including the National Environmental Policy Act and the Tax Reform Act of 1969. Another highprofile victory for the Republican minority was the State and Local Fiscal Assistance act. Passed in 1972, the act established a Revenue Sharing program for state and local governments. Fords leadership was instrumental in shepherding revenue sharing through Congress, and resulted in a bipartisan coalition that supported the bill with 223 votes in favor . During the eight years that Ford served as Minority Leader, he won many friends in the House because of his fair leadership and inoffensive personality. Vice presidency Gerald and Betty Ford with the President and First Lady Pat Nixon after President Nixon nominated Ford to be Vice President, October 13, 1973 To become House Speaker, Ford worked to help Republicans across the country get a majority in the chamber, often traveling on the rubber chicken circuit. After a decade of failing to do so, he promised his wife that he would try again in 1974 then retire in 1976. On October 10, 1973, Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned and then pleaded no contest to criminal charges of tax evasion and money laundering, part of a negotiated resolution to a scheme in which he accepted 29,500 in bribes while governor of Maryland. According to The New York Times , Nixon sought advice from senior Congressional leaders about a replacement. The advice was unanimous. We gave Nixon no choice but Ford, House Speaker Carl Albert recalled later. Ford agreed to the nomination, telling his wife that the Vice Presidency would be a nice conclusion to his career. Ford was nominated to take Agnews position on October 12, the first time the vicepresidential vacancy provision of the 25th Amendment had been implemented. The United States Senate voted 92 to 3 to confirm Ford on November 27. Only three Senators, all Democrats, voted against Fords confirmation Gaylord Nelson of Wisconsin, Thomas Eagleton of Missouri and William Hathaway of Maine. On December 6, 1973, the House confirmed Ford by a vote of 387 to 35. One hour after the confirmation vote in the House, Ford took the oath of office as Vice President of the United States. Ford became Vice President as the Watergate scandal was unfolding. On Thursday, August 1, 1974, Chief of Staff Alexander Haig contacted Ford to tell him that smoking gun evidence had been found. The evidence left little doubt that President Nixon had been a part of the Watergate coverup. At the time, Ford and his wife, Betty, were living in suburban Virginia, waiting for their expected move into the newly designated vice presidents residence in Washington, D.C. However, Al Haig asked to come over and see me, Ford later said, to tell me that there would be a new tape released on a Monday, and he said the evidence in there was devastating and there would probably be either an impeachment or a resignation. And he said, Im just warning you that youve got to be prepared, that things might change dramatically and you could become President. And I said, Betty, I dont think were ever going to live in the vice presidents house. Presidency Swearingin Gerald Ford is sworn in as the 38th President of the United States by Chief Justice Warren Burger in the White House East Room, while Betty Ford looks on. When Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974, Ford assumed the presidency, making him the only person to assume the presidency without having been previously voted into either the presidential or vice presidential office. Immediately after taking the oath of office in the East Room of the White House, he spoke to the assembled audience in a speech broadcast live to the nation. Ford noted the peculiarity of his position I am acutely aware that you have not elected me as your president by your ballots, and so I ask you to confirm me as your president with your prayers. He went on to state Ford and his golden retriever, Liberty, in the Oval Office, 1974 He also stated Message to Congress nominating Nelson A. Rockefeller to be Vice President A portion of the speech would later be memorialized with a plaque at the entrance to his presidential museum. On August 20, Ford nominated former New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller to fill the vice presidency he had vacated. Rockefellers top competitor had been George H. W. Bush. Rockefeller underwent extended hearings before Congress, which caused embarrassment when it was revealed he made large gifts to senior aides, such as Henry Kissinger. Although conservative Republicans were not pleased that Rockefeller was picked, most of them voted for his confirmation, and his nomination passed both the House and Senate. Some, including Barry Goldwater, voted against him. Pardon of Nixon President Ford appears at a House Judiciary Subcommittee hearing regarding his pardon of Richard Nixon On September 8, 1974, Ford issued Proclamation 4311, which gave Nixon a full and unconditional pardon for any crimes he might have committed against the United States while President. In a televised broadcast to the nation, Ford explained that he felt the pardon was in the best interests of the country, and that the Nixon familys situation is a tragedy in which we all have played a part. It could go on and on and on, or someone must write the end to it. I have concluded that only I can do that, and if I can, I must. Fords decision to pardon Nixon was highly controversial. Critics derided the move and said a corrupt bargain had been struck between the men. They said that Fords pardon was granted in exchange for Nixons resignation, which had elevated Ford to the presidency. Fords first press secretary and close friend Jerald terHorst resigned his post in protest after the pardon. According to Bob Woodward, Nixon Chief of Staff Alexander Haig proposed a pardon deal to Ford. He later decided to pardon Nixon for other reasons, primarily the friendship he and Nixon shared. Regardless, historians believe the controversy was one of the major reasons Ford lost the 1976 presidential election, an observation with which Ford agreed. In an editorial at the time, The New York Times stated that the Nixon pardon was a profoundly unwise, divisive and unjust act that in a stroke had destroyed the new presidents credibility as a man of judgment, candor and competence. On October 17, 1974, Ford testified before Congress on the pardon. He was the first sitting President since Abraham Lincoln to testify before the House of Representatives. In the months following the pardon, Ford often declined to mention President Nixon by name, referring to him in public as my predecessor or the former president. When, on a 1974 trip to California, White House correspondent Fred Barnes pressed Ford on the matter, Ford replied in surprisingly frank manner I just can t bring myself to do it. After Ford left the White House in January 1977, the former President privately justified his pardon of Nixon by carrying in his wallet a portion of the text of Burdick v. United States , a 1915 U.S. Supreme Court decision which stated that a pardon indicated a presumption of guilt, and that acceptance of a pardon was tantamount to a confession of that guilt. Shadow , by Bob Woodward, chapter on Gerald Ford Woodward interviewed Ford on this matter, about twenty years after Ford left the presidency In 2001, the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation awarded the John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award to Ford for his pardon of Nixon. In presenting the award to Ford, Senator Edward Kennedy said that he had initially been opposed to the pardon, but later decided that history had proved Ford to have made the correct decision.Sen. Ted Kennedy crossed political paths with Grand Rapids most prominent Republican, President Gerald R. Ford, The Grand Rapids Press , August 26, 2009. Retrieved January 5, 2010. Pardon given by President Ford under Proclamation 4313 Draft dodgers and deserters On September 16, shortly after he announced the Nixon pardon, Ford introduced a conditional amnesty program for Vietnam War draft dodgers who had fled to countries such as Canada, and for military deserters, in Presidential Proclamation 4313. The conditions of the amnesty required that those reaffirm their allegiance to the United States and serve two years working in a public service job or a total of two years service for those who had served less than two years of honorable service in the military. The program for the Return of Vietnam Era Draft Evaders and Military Deserters established a Clemency Board to review the records and make recommendations for receiving a Presidential Pardon and a change in Military discharge status. Full pardon for draft dodgers came in the Carter Administration. Administration officials Upon assuming office, Ford inherited Nixons Cabinet. During Fords brief administration, all members were replaced except Secretary of State Kissinger and Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon. Fords dramatic reorganization of his Cabinet in the fall of 1975 has been referred to by political commentators as the Halloween Massacre. One of Fords appointees, William Coleman, as Secretary of Transportation, was the second black man to serve in a presidential cabinet and the first appointed in a Republican administration.Secretary of Transportation William T. Coleman Jr. AmericanPresident.org . Retrieved December 31, 2006. Other members of the administration United States National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger Brent Scowcroft Director of Central Intelligence William Colby George H. W. Bush Press Secretary Jerald terHorst Ron Nessen United States Ambassador to the United Nations John A. Scali Daniel Patrick Moynihan William Scranton Ford selected George H. W. Bush as Chief of the US Liaison Office to the Peoples Republic of China in 1974, and then Director of the Central Intelligence Agency in late 1975. Fords transition chairman and first Chief of Staff was former congressman and ambassador Donald Rumsfeld. In 1975, Rumsfeld was named by Ford as the youngestever Secretary of Defense. Ford chose a young Wyoming politician, Richard Cheney, to replace Rumsfeld as his new Chief of Staff Cheney became the campaign manager for Fords 1976 presidential campaign.Richard B. Cheney . United States Department of Defense. Retrieved December 31, 2006. Midterm elections Ford in the Oval Office, 1974 The 1974 Congressional midterm elections took place less than three months after Ford assumed office and in the wake of the Watergate scandal. The Democratic Party turned voter dissatisfaction into large gains in the House elections, taking 49 seats from the Republican Party, increasing their majority to 291 of the 435 seats. This was one more than the number needed for a twothirds majority, the number necessary to override a Presidential veto or to propose a constitutional amendment. Perhaps due in part to this fact, the 94th Congress overrode the highest percentage of vetoes since Andrew Johnson was President of the United States .Bush vetoes less than most presidents, CNN, May 1, 2007. Retrieved October 19, 2007. Even Fords former, reliably Republican House seat was won by a Democrat, Richard Vander Veen, who defeated Robert VanderLaan. In the Senate elections, the Democratic majority became 61 in the 100seat body.Renka, Russell D. Nixons Fall and the Ford and Carter Interregnum. Southeast Missouri State University, . Retrieved December 31, 2006. Domestic policy Inflation President Ford meets with his Cabinet in 1975 The economy was a great concern during the Ford administration. One of the first acts the new president took to deal with the economy was to create, by Executive Order on September 30, 1974, the Economic Policy Board.Greene, John Robert. The Presidency of Gerald R. Ford . University Press of Kansas, 1995 In October 1974, in response to rising inflation, Ford went before the American public and asked them to W hip I nflation N ow. As part of this program, he urged people to wear WIN buttons.Gerald Ford Speeches Whip Inflation Now , Miller Center of Public Affairs. Retrieved May 18, 2011 At the time, inflation was believed to be the primary threat to the economy, more so than growing unemployment there was a belief that controlling inflation would help reduce unemployment. To rein in inflation, it was necessary to control the publics spending. To try to mesh service and sacrifice, WIN called for Americans to reduce their spending and consumption.Brinkley, Douglas. Gerald R. Ford . New York Times Books, 2007 On October 4, 1974, Ford gave a speech in front of a joint session of Congress as a part of this speech he kicked off the WIN campaign. Over the next nine days 101,240 Americans mailed in WIN pledges. In hindsight, this was viewed as simply a public relations gimmick which had no way of solving the underlying problems. The main point of that speech was to introduce to Congress a oneyear, fivepercent income tax increase on corporations and wealthy individuals. This plan would also take 4.4billion out of the budget, bringing federal spending below 300billion.Crain, Andrew Downer. The Ford Presidency . Jefferson, North Carolina McFarland, 2009 At the time, inflation was over twelve percent. Budget The federal budget ran a deficit every year Ford was President.CRS Report RL33305, The Crude Oil Windfall Profit Tax of the 1980s Implications for Current Energy Policy , by Salvatore Lazzari, p. 5. Despite his reservations about how the program ultimately would be funded in an era of tight public budgeting, Ford signed the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975, which established special education throughout the United States. Ford expressed strong support for full educational opportunities for our handicapped children according to the official White House press release for the bill signing.President Gerald R. Fords Statement on Signing the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975, Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library, December 2, 1975. Retrieved December 31, 2006. The economic focus began to change as the country sank into the worst recession since the Great Depression four decades earlier. The focus of the Ford administration turned to stopping the rise in unemployment, which reached nine percent in May 1975. In January 1975, Ford proposed a 1year tax reduction of 16billion to stimulate economic growth, along with spending cuts to avoid inflation. Ford was criticized greatly for quickly switching from advocating a tax increase to a tax reduction. In Congress, the proposed amount of the tax reduction increased to 22.8billion in tax cuts and lacked spending cuts. In March 1975, Congress passed, and Ford signed into law, these income tax rebates as part of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975. This resulted in a federal deficit of around 53billion for the 1975 fiscal year and 73.7billion for 1976. When New York City faced bankruptcy in 1975, Mayor Abraham Beame was unsuccessful in obtaining Fords support for a federal bailout. The incident prompted the New York Daily News famous headline Ford to City Drop Dead, referring to a speech in which Ford declared flatly ... that he would veto any bill calling for a federal bailout of New York City. Swine flu Ford was confronted with a potential swine flu pandemic. In the early 1970s, an influenza strain H1N1 shifted from a form of flu that affected primarily pigs and crossed over to humans. On February 5, 1976, an army recruit at Fort Dix mysteriously died and four fellow soldiers were hospitalized health officials announced that swine flu was the cause. Soon after, public health officials in the Ford administration urged that every person in the United States be vaccinated.Pandemic Pointers. Living on Earth, March 3, 2006. Retrieved December 31, 2006. Although the vaccination program was plagued by delays and public relations problems, some 25 of the population was vaccinated by the time the program was canceled in December 1976. The vaccine was blamed for twentyfive deaths more people died from the shots than from the swine flu.Mickle, Paul. 1976 Fear of a great plague. The Trentonian . Retrieved December 31, 2006. Other domestic issues Cheney, Rumsfeld and President Ford in the Oval Office, 1975 Ford was an outspoken supporter of the Equal Rights Amendment, issuing Presidential Proclamation no. 4383 in 1975 As president, Fords position on abortion was that he supported a federal constitutional amendment that would permit each one of the 50 States to make the choice. This had also been his position as House Minority Leader in response to the 1973 Supreme Court case of Roe v. Wade , which he opposed. Ford came under criticism for a 60 Minutes interview his wife Betty gave in 1975, in which she stated that Roe v. Wade was a great, great decision. During his later life, Ford would identify as prochoice. Foreign policy Ford meets with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev during the Vladivostok Summit, November 1974, to sign a joint communiqu on the SALT treaty Ford makes remarks at a Reciprocal Dinner in Beijing on December 4, 1975. Ford continued the dtente policy with both the Soviet Union and China, easing the tensions of the Cold War. Still in place from the Nixon Administration was the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty . The thawing relationship brought about by Nixons visit to China was reinforced by Fords December 1975 visit to that communist country. In 1975, the Administration entered into the Helsinki Accords with the Soviet Union, creating the framework of the Helsinki Watch, an independent nongovernmental organization created to monitor compliance that later evolved into Human Rights Watch. Ford attended the inaugural meeting of the Group of Seven industrialized nations in 1975 and secured membership for Canada. Ford supported international solutions to issues. We live in an interdependent world and, therefore, must work together to resolve common economic problems, he said in a 1974 speech. According to internal White House and Commission documents posted in February 2016 by the National Security Archive at The George Washington University, the Gerald Ford White House significantly altered the final report of the supposedly independent 1975 Rockefeller Commission investigating CIA domestic activities, over the objections of senior Commission staff. The changes included removal of an entire 86page section on CIA assassination plots and numerous edits to the report by thendeputy White House Chief of Staff Richard Cheney. Middle East Countries visited by Ford during his presidency In the Middle East and eastern Mediterranean, two ongoing international disputes developed into crises. The Cyprus dispute turned into a crisis with the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, causing extreme strain within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance. In midAugust, the Greek government withdrew Greece from the NATO military structure in midSeptember 1974, the Senate and House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted to halt military aid to Turkey. Ford, concerned with both the effect of this on TurkishAmerican relations and the deterioration of security on NATOs eastern front, vetoed the bill. A second bill was then passed by Congress, which Ford also vetoed, although a compromise was accepted to continue aid until the end of the year. As Ford expected, Turkish relations were considerably disrupted until 1978. Ford with Anwar Sadat in Salzburg, 1975 In the continuing Arab Israeli conflict, although the initial cease fire had been implemented to end active conflict in the Yom Kippur War, Kissingers continuing shuttle diplomacy was showing little progress. Ford considered it stalling and wrote, Their Israeli tactics frustrated the Egyptians and made me mad as hell.Gerald Ford, A Time to Heal, 1979, p.240 During Kissingers shuttle to Israel in early March 1975, a last minute reversal to consider further withdrawal, prompted a cable from Ford to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, which included On March 24, Ford informed congressional leaders of both parties of the reassessment of the administration policies in the Middle East. Reassessment, in practical terms, meant canceling or suspending further aid to Israel. For six months between March and September 1975, the United States refused to conclude any new arms agreements with Israel. Rabin notes it was an innocentsounding term that heralded one of the worst periods in AmericanIsraeli relations. The announced reassessments upset the American Jewish community and Israels wellwishers in Congress. On May 21, Ford experienced a real shock when seventysix U.S. senators wrote him a letter urging him to be responsive to Israels request for 2.59billion in military and economic aid. Ford felt truly annoyed and thought the chance for peace was jeopardized. It was, since the September 1974 ban on arms to Turkey, the second major congressional intrusion upon the Presidents foreign policy prerogatives.George Lenczowski, American Presidents, and the Middle East, 1990, p.150 The following summer months were described by Ford as an AmericanIsraeli war of nerves or test of wills.Gerald Ford, A Time to Heal, 1979, p.298 After much bargaining, the Sinai Interim Agreement , was formally signed on September 1, and aid resumed. Vietnam Ford and his daughter Susan watch as Henry Kissinger shakes hands with Mao Zedong, December 2, 1975 One of Fords greatest challenges was dealing with the continued Vietnam War. American offensive operations against North Vietnam had ended with the Paris Peace Accords, signed on January 27, 1973. The accords declared a cease fire across both North and South Vietnam, and required the release of American prisoners of war. The agreement guaranteed the territorial integrity of Vietnam and, like the Geneva Conference of 1954, called for national elections in the North and South. The Paris Peace Accords stipulated a sixtyday period for the total withdrawal of U.S. forces. The accords had been negotiated by United States National Security Advisor Kissinger and North Vietnamese politburo member L c Th. South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu was not involved in the final negotiations, and publicly criticized the proposed agreement. However, antiwar pressures within the United States forced Nixon and Kissinger to pressure Thieu to sign the agreement and enable the withdrawal of American forces. In multiple letters to the South Vietnamese president, Nixon had promised that the United States would defend Thieus government, should the North Vietnamese violate the accords. In December 1974, months after Ford took office, North Vietnamese forces invaded the province of Phuoc Long. General Trn Vn Tr sought to gauge any South Vietnamese or American response to the invasion, as well as to solve logistical issues, before proceeding with the invasion. As North Vietnamese forces advanced, Ford requested Congress approve a 722million aid package for South Vietnam, funds that had been promised by the Nixon administration. Congress voted against the proposal by a wide margin. Senator Jacob K. Javits offered ...large sums for evacuation, but not one nickel for military aid. President Thieu resigned on April 21, 1975, publicly blaming the lack of support from the United States for the fall of his country. Two days later, on April 23, Ford gave a speech at Tulane University. In that speech, he announced that the Vietnam War was over ...as far as America is concerned. The announcement was met with thunderous applause. South Vietnamese refugees arrive on a U.S. Navy vessel during Operation Frequent Wind 1,373 U.S. citizens and 5,595 Vietnamese and third country nationals were evacuated from the South Vietnamese capital of Saigon during Operation Frequent Wind. In that operation, military and Air America helicopters took evacuees to U.S. Navy ships offshore during an approximately 24hour period on April 29 to 30, 1975, immediately preceding the fall of Saigon. During the operation, so many South Vietnamese helicopters landed on the vessels taking the evacuees that some were pushed overboard to make room for more people. Other helicopters, having nowhere to land, were deliberately crash landed into the sea after dropping off their passengers, close to the ships, their pilots bailing out at the last moment to be picked up by rescue boats. Many of the Vietnamese evacuees were allowed to enter the United States under the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act. The 1975 Act appropriated 455million toward the costs of assisting the settlement of Indochinese refugees.Plummer Alston Jones . Still struggling for equality American public library services with minorities . Libraries Unlimited. p.84. In all, 130,000 Vietnamese refugees came to the United States in 1975. Thousands more escaped in the years that followed. Mayaguez and Panmunjom North Vietnams victory over the South led to a considerable shift in the political winds in Asia, and Ford administration officials worried about a consequent loss of U.S. influence there. The administration proved it was willing to respond forcefully to challenges to its interests in the region on two occasions, once when Khmer Rouge forces seized an American ship in international waters and again when American military officers were killed in the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea.Gawthorpe, A. J. , The Ford Administration and Security Policy in the AsiaPacific after the Fall of Saigon, The Historical Journal , 52 697 716. The first crisis was the Mayaguez incident. In May 1975, shortly after the fall of Saigon and the Khmer Rouge conquest of Cambodia, Cambodians seized the American merchant ship Mayaguez in international waters. Ford dispatched Marines to rescue the crew, but the Marines landed on the wrong island and met unexpectedly stiff resistance just as, unknown to the U.S., the Mayaguez sailors were being released. In the operation, two military transport helicopters carrying the Marines for the assault operation were shot down, and 41 U.S. servicemen were killed and 50 wounded while approximately 60 Khmer Rouge soldiers were killed. Despite the American losses, the operation was seen as a success in the United States and Ford enjoyed an 11point boost in his approval ratings in the aftermath.Gerald R. Ford, A Time to Heal , p. 284 The Americans killed during the operation became the last to have their names inscribed on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial wall in Washington, D.C. Some historians have argued that the Ford administration felt the need to respond forcefully to the incident because it was construed as a Soviet plot.Ccile MentrayMonchau , The Mayaguez Incident as an Epilogue to the Vietnam War and its Reflection on the PostVietnam Political Equilibrium in Southeast Asia, Cold War History , p. 346. But work by Andrew Gawthorpe, published in 2009, based on an analysis of the administrations internal discussions, shows that Fords national security team understood that the seizure of the vessel was a local, and perhaps even accidental, provocation by an immature Khmer government. Nevertheless, they felt the need to respond forcefully to discourage further provocations by other Communist countries in Asia. The second crisis, known as the axe murder incident, occurred at Panmunjom, a village which stands in the DMZ between the two Koreas. Encouraged by U.S. difficulties in Vietnam, North Korea had been waging a campaign of diplomatic pressure and minor military harassment to try and convince the U.S. to withdraw from South Korea.Oberdorfer, Don , The two Koreas a contemporary history , pp. 47 83. Then, in August 1976, North Korean forces killed two U.S. officers and injured South Korean guards who were engaged in trimming a tree in Panmunjoms Joint Security Area. The attack coincided with a meeting of the Conference of NonAligned Nations in Colombo, Sri Lanka, at which Kim Jongil, the son of North Korean leader Kim Ilsung, presented the incident as an example of American aggression, helping secure the passage of a motion calling for a U.S. withdrawal from the South.Gawthorpe, The Ford Administration and Security Policy, p. 711. At administration meetings, Kissinger voiced the concern that the North would see the U.S. as the paper tigers of Saigon if they did not respond, and Ford agreed with that assessment. After mulling various options the Ford administration decided that it was necessary to respond with a major show of force. A large number of ground forces went to cut down the tree, while at the same time the air force was deployed, which included B52 bomber flights over Panmunjom. The North Korean government backed down and allowed the treecutting to go ahead, and later issued an unprecedented official apology.Gawthorpe, The Ford Administration and Security Policy, pp. 710 714. Indonesian invasion of East Timor East Timors decolonization due to political instability in Portugal saw Indonesia posture to annex the new state in 1975. Just hours before the Indonesian invasion of East Timor on December 7, 1975, Ford and Kissinger had visited Indonesian President Suharto in Jakarta and guaranteed American compliance with the Indonesian operation. Suharto had been a key supporter of American influence in Indonesia and Southeast Asia and Ford did not desire to place pressure on the AmericanIndonesian relationship.Ricklefs, A History of Modern Indonesia since c. 1200, p. 342. Under Ford, a policy of arms sales to the Suharto regime began in 1975, before the invasion. Roughly 90 of the Indonesian armys weapons at the time of East Timors invasion were provided by the U.S. according to George H. Aldrich, a former State Department deputy legal advisor.1977 hearing of the House International Relations Committee Postinvasion, Fords military aid averaged about 30 million annually throughout East Timors occupation, and arms sales increased exponentially under President Carter. This policy continued until 1999. Assassination attempts Reaction immediately after the second assassination attempt Ford faced two assassination attempts during his presidency. In Sacramento, California, on September 5, 1975, Lynette Squeaky Fromme, a follower of Charles Manson, pointed a Colt .45caliber handgun at Ford. As Fromme pulled the trigger, Larry Buendorf,Election Is Crunch Time for U.S. Secret Service. National Geographic News. Retrieved March 2, 2008. a Secret Service agent, grabbed the gun, and Fromme was taken into custody. She was later convicted of attempted assassination of the President and was sentenced to life in prison she was paroled on August 14, 2009. In reaction to this attempt, the Secret Service began keeping Ford at a more secure distance from anonymous crowds, a strategy that may have saved his life seventeen days later. As he left the St. Francis Hotel in downtown San Francisco, Sara Jane Moore, standing in a crowd of onlookers across the street, pointed her .38caliber revolver at him. Moore fired a single round but missed because the sights were off. Just before she fired a second round, retired Marine Oliver Sipple grabbed at the gun and deflected her shot the bullet struck a wall about six inches above and to the right of Fords head, then ricocheted and hit a taxi driver, who was slightly wounded. Moore was later sentenced to life in prison. She was paroled on December 31, 2007, after serving 32 years. Judicial appointments Supreme Court John Paul Stevens was Fords only Supreme Court appointment. In 1975, Ford appointed John Paul Stevens as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States to replace retiring Justice William O. Douglas. Stevens had been a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, appointed by President Nixon. During his tenure as House Republican leader, Ford had led efforts to have Douglas impeached. After being confirmed, Stevens eventually disappointed some conservatives by siding with the Courts liberal wing regarding the outcome of many key issues. Nevertheless, in 2005 Ford praised Stevens. He has served his nation well, Ford said of Stevens, with dignity, intellect and without partisan political concerns.Letter from Gerald Ford to Michael Treanor . Fordham University, September 21, 2005. Retrieved March 2, 2008. Other judicial appointments Ford appointed 11 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 50 judges to the United States district courts.Biographical Directory of Federal Judges, a publicdomain publication of the Federal Judicial Center. 1976 presidential election Governor Ronald Reagan congratulates President Ford after the president successfully wins the 1976 Republican nomination, while Bob Dole, Nancy Reagan, and Nelson Rockefeller look on. Ford reluctantly agreed to run for office in 1976, but first he had to counter a challenge for the Republican party nomination. Former Governor of California Ronald Reagan and the partys conservative wing faulted Ford for failing to do more in South Vietnam, for signing the Helsinki Accords, and for negotiating to cede the Panama Canal. Reagan launched his campaign in autumn of 1975 and won numerous primaries, including North Carolina, Texas, Indiana, and California, but failed to get a majority of delegates Reagan withdrew from the race at the Republican Convention in Kansas City, Missouri. The conservative insurgency did lead to Ford dropping the more liberal Vice President Nelson Rockefeller in favor of U.S. Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.Another Loss For the Gipper. Time , March 29, 1976. Retrieved December 31, 2006. In addition to the pardon dispute and lingering antiRepublican sentiment, Ford had to counter a plethora of negative media imagery. Chevy Chase often did pratfalls on Saturday Night Live , imitating Ford, who had been seen stumbling on two occasions during his term. As Chase commented, He even mentioned in his own autobiography it had an effect over a period of time that affected the election to some degree.VH1 News Presents Politics A Pop Culture History Premiering Wednesday, October 20 at 1000pm . PRNewswire October 19, 2004. Retrieved December 31, 2006. Fords 1976 election campaign benefitted from his being an incumbent president during several anniversary events held during the period leading up to the United States Bicentennial. The Washington, D.C. fireworks display on the Fourth of July was presided over by the President and televised nationally.Election of 1976 A Political Outsider Prevails. CSPAN. Retrieved December 31, 2006. On July 7, 1976, the President and First Lady served as hosts at a White House state dinner for Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip of the United Kingdom, which was televised on the Public Broadcasting Service network. The 200th anniversary of the Battles of Lexington and Concord in Massachusetts gave Ford the opportunity to deliver a speech to 110,000 in Concord acknowledging the need for a strong national defense tempered with a plea for reconciliation, not recrimination and reconstruction, not rancor between the United States and those who would pose threats to peace.Shabecoff, Philip. 160,000 Mark Two 1775 Battles Concord Protesters Jeer Ford Reconciliation Plea, The New York Times , April 20, 1975, p. 1. Speaking in New Hampshire on the previous day, Ford condemned the growing trend toward big government bureaucracy and argued for a return to basic American virtues.Shabecoff, Philip. Ford, on Bicentennial Trip, Bids U.S. Heed Old Values, The New York Times , April 19, 1975, p. 1. Ford and Jimmy Carter in a debate on September 23, 1976. Democratic nominee and former Georgia governor Jimmy Carter campaigned as an outsider and reformer, gaining support from voters dismayed by the Watergate scandal and Nixon pardon. After the Democratic National Convention, he held a huge 33point lead over Ford in the polls. However, as the campaign continued, the race tightened, and, by election day, the polls showed the race as too close to call. There were three main events in the fall campaign. Most importantly, Carter repeated a promise of a blanket pardon for Christian and other religious refugees, and also all Vietnam War draft dodgers in response to a question on the subject posed by a reporter during the presidential debates, an act which froze Fords poll numbers in Ohio, Wisconsin, Hawaii, and Mississippi. It was the first act signed by Carter, on January 20, 1977. Earlier, Playboy magazine had published a controversial interview with Carter in the interview Carter admitted to having lusted in my heart for women other than his wife, which cut into his support among women and evangelical Christians. Also, on September 24, Ford performed well in what was the first televised presidential debate since 1960. Polls taken after the debate showed that most viewers felt that Ford was the winner. Carter was also hurt by Fords charges that he lacked the necessary experience to be an effective national leader, and that Carter was vague on many issues. Ford campaigns at the Nassau County Veterans Coliseum in Hempstead, New York on October 31, 1976 during the final days of the campaign. Televised presidential debates were reintroduced for the first time since the 1960 election. As such, Ford became the first incumbent president to participate in one. Carter later attributed his victory in the election to the debates, saying they gave the viewers reason to think that Jimmy Carter had something to offer. The turning point came in the second debate when Ford blundered by stating, There is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe and there never will be under a Ford Administration. Ford also said that he did not believe that the Poles consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union. In an interview years later, Ford said he had intended to imply that the Soviets would never crush the spirits of eastern Europeans seeking independence. However, the phrasing was so awkward that questioner Max Frankel was visibly incredulous at the response. As a result of this blunder, and Carters promise of a full presidential pardon for political refugees from the Vietnam era during the presidential debates, Fords surge stalled and Carter was able to maintain a slight lead in the polls. 1976 electoral vote results. In the end, Carter won the election, receiving 50.1 of the popular vote and 297 electoral votes compared with 48.0 and 240 electoral votes for Ford. The election was close enough that had fewer than 25,000 votes shifted in Ohio and Wisconsin both of which neighbored his home state Ford would have won the electoral vote with 276 votes to 261 for Carter.Presidential Election 1976 States Carried. multied.com. Retrieved December 31, 2006. Though he lost, in the three months between the Republican National Convention and the election Ford had managed to close what was once an alleged 33point Carter lead to a 2point margin. Ford carried 27 states versus 23 carried by Carter. Had Ford won the election, the provisions of the 22nd Amendment would have disqualified him from running in 1980, because he had served more than two years of Nixons remaining term. Postpresidency Activity The Nixon pardon controversy eventually subsided. Fords successor, Jimmy Carter, opened his 1977 inaugural address by praising the outgoing President, saying, For myself and for our Nation, I want to thank my predecessor for all he has done to heal our land. Ford remained relatively active in the years after his presidency. He continued to make appearances at events of historical and ceremonial significance to the nation, such as presidential inaugurals and memorial services. In January 1977, he became the president of Eisenhower Fellowships in Philadelphia, then served as the chairman of its board of trustees from 1980 to 1986.Perrone, Marguerite. Eisenhower Fellowship A History 1953 2003. 2003. Later in 1977, he reluctantly agreed to be interviewed by James M. Naughton, a New York Times journalist who was given the assignment to write the former Presidents advance obituary, an article that would be updated prior to its eventual publication. In 1979, Ford published his autobiography, A Time to Heal . A review in Foreign Affairs described it as, Serene, unruffled, unpretentious, like the author. This is the shortest and most honest of recent presidential memoirs, but there are no surprises, no deep probings of motives or events. No more here than meets the eye. During the term of office of his successor, Jimmy Carter, Ford received monthly briefs by President Carters senior staff on international and domestic issues, and was always invited to lunch at the White House whenever he was in Washington, D.C. Their close friendship developed after Carter had left office, with the catalyst being their trip together to the funeral of Anwar elSadat in 1981. Until Fords death, Carter and his wife, Rosalynn, visited the Fords home frequently. Ford and Carter served as honorary cochairs of the National Commission on Federal Election Reform in 2001 and of the Continuity of Government Commission in 2002. Like Presidents Carter, George H. W. Bush, and Clinton, Ford was an honorary cochair of the Council for Excellence in Government, a group dedicated to excellence in government performance, which provides leadership training to top federal employees. In retirement Ford also devoted much time to his love of golf, often playing both privately and in public events with comedian Bob Hope, a longtime friend. In 1977, he shot a hole in one during a Proam held in conjunction with the Danny Thomas Memphis Classic at Colonial Country Club in Memphis, Tennessee. He hosted the Jerry Ford Invitational in Vail, Colorado from 1977 to 1996. Ford considered a run for the Republican nomination in 1980, foregoing numerous opportunities to serve on corporate boards to keep his options open for a rematch with Carter. Ford attacked Carters conduct of the SALT II negotiations and foreign policy in the Middle East and Africa. Many have argued that Ford also wanted to exorcise his image as an Accidental President and to win a term in his own right. Ford also believed the more conservative Ronald Reagan would be unable to defeat Carter and would hand the incumbent a second term. Ford was encouraged by his former Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger as well as Jim Rhodes of Ohio and Bill Clements of Texas to make the race. On March 15, 1980, Ford announced that he would forgo a run for the Republican nomination, vowing to support the eventual nominee. On July 16, 1980 Gerald Ford consults with Bob Dole, Howard Baker and Bill Brock before making a decision to ultimately decline the offer to serve as Ronald Reagans runningmate After securing the Republican nomination in 1980, Ronald Reagan considered his former rival Ford as a potential vicepresidential runningmate, but negotiations between the Reagan and Ford camps at the Republican National Convention were unsuccessful. Ford conditioned his acceptance on Reagans agreement to an unprecedented copresidency, giving Ford the power to control key executive branch appointments . After rejecting these terms, Reagan offered the vicepresidential nomination instead to George H. W. Bush.Allen, Richard V. How the Bush Dynasty Almost Wasnt , Hoover Institution, reprinted from the New York Times Magazine , July 30, 2000. Retrieved December 31, 2006. Ford did appear in a campaign commercial for the ReaganBush ticket, in which he declared that the country would be better served by a Reagan presidency rather than a continuation of the weak and politically expedient policies of Jimmy Carter. On October 8, 1980, Ford said President Nixons involvement in the general election potentially could negatively impact the Reagan campaign I think it would have been much more helpful if Mr. Nixon had stayed in the background during this campaign. It would have been much more beneficial to Ronald Reagan. On October 3, 1980, Ford cast blame on Carter for the latters charges of ineffectiveness on the part of the Federal Reserve Board due to his appointing of most of its members President Carter, when the going gets tough, will do anything to save his own political skin. This latest action by the president is cowardly. After the attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan, Ford told reporters while appearing at a fundraiser for Thomas Kean that criminals who use firearms should get the death penalty in the event someone is injured with the weapon. After his presidency, Ford joined the American Enterprise Institute as a distinguished fellow. He founded the annual AEI World Forum in 1982. Ford was awarded an honorary doctorate at Central Connecticut State University on March 23, 1988. After leaving the White House, Ford and his wife moved to Denver, Colorado. Ford successfully invested in oil with Marvin Davis, which later provided an income for Fords children. In September 1981, Ford advised Reagan against succumbing to Wall Street demands and follow his own agenda for the economic policies of the US during an appearance on Good Morning America He shouldnt let the gurus of Wall Street decide what the economic future of this country is going to be. They are wrong in my opinion. On October 20, 1981, Ford stated stopping the Reagan administrations Saudi arms package could have a large negative impact to American relations in the Middle East during a news conference. On March 24, 1982, Ford offered an endorsement of President Reagans economic policies while also stating the possibility of Reagan being met with a stalemate by Congress if not willing to compromise while in Washington. During an August 1982 fundraising reception, Ford stated his opposition to a constitution amendment requiring the US to have a balanced budget, citing a need to elect members of the House and Senate who will immediately when Congress convenes act more responsibly in fiscal matters. Ford was a participant in the 1982 midterm elections, traveling to Tennessee in October of that year to help Republican candidates. In January 1984, a letter signed by Ford and Carter and urging world leaders to extend their failed effort to end world hunger was released and sent to SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Javier Prez de Cullar. In 1987, Ford testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee in favor of District of Columbia Circuit Court judge and former Solicitor General Robert Bork after Bork was nominated by President Reagan to be an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court. Borks nomination was rejected by a vote of 5842. In 1987 Fords Humor and the Presidency , a book of humorous political anecdotes, was published. By 1988, Ford was a member of several corporate boards including Commercial Credit, Nova Pharmaceutical, The Pullman Company, Tesoro Petroleum, and Tiger International, Inc. Ford also became an honorary director of Citigroup, a position he held till his death. In 1977, Ford established the Gerald R. Ford Institute of Public Policy at Albion College in Albion, Michigan, to give undergraduates training in public policy. In April 1981, he opened the Gerald R. Ford Library in Ann Arbor, Michigan, on the north campus of his alma mater, the University of Michigan, followed in September by the Gerald R. Ford Museum in Grand Rapids. In October 1990, Ford appeared in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania with Bob Hope to commemorate the centennial anniversary of the birth of former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, where the two unveiled a plaque with the signatures of each living former president. In April 1991, Ford joined former presidents Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, and Jimmy Carter, in supporting the Brady Bill. Three years later, he wrote to the U.S. House of Representatives, along with Carter and Reagan, in support of the assault weapons ban. At the 1992 Republican National Convention, Ford compared the election cycle to his 1976 loss to Carter and urged attention be paid to electing a Republican Congress If its change you want on Nov. 3, my friends, the place to start is not at the White House but in the United States Capitol. Congress, as every school child knows, has the power of the purse. For nearly 40 years, Democratic majorities have held to the timetested New Deal formula, tax and tax, spend and spend, elect and elect. Ford at his 90th birthday with Laura Bush, President George W. Bush, and Betty Ford in the White House State Dining Room in 2003 In April 1997, Ford joined President Bill Clinton, former President Bush, and Nancy Reagan in signing the Summit Declaration of Commitment in advocating for participation by private citizens in solving domestic issues within the United States. On January 20, 1998, during an interview at his Palm Springs home, Ford said the Republican Partys nominee in the 2000 presidential election would lose if very conservative in their ideals If we get way over on the hard right of the political spectrum, we will not elect a Republican President. I worry about the party going down this ultraconservative line. We ought to learn from the Democrats when they were running ultraliberal candidates, they didnt win. In the prelude to the impeachment of President Clinton, Ford conferred with former President Carter and the two agreed to not speak publicly on the controversy, a pact broken by Carter when answering a question from a student at Emory University. In October 2001, Ford broke with conservative members of the Republican Party by stating that gay and lesbian couples ought to be treated equally. Period. He became the highest ranking Republican to embrace full equality for gays and lesbians, stating his belief that there should be a federal amendment outlawing antigay job discrimination and expressing his hope that the Republican Party would reach out to gay and lesbian voters.Price, Deb. Gerald Ford Treat gay couples equally . The Detroit News , October 29, 2001. Retrieved December 28, 2006 He also was a member of the Republican Unity Coalition, which The New York Times described as a group of prominent Republicans, including former President Gerald R. Ford, dedicated to making sexual orientation a nonissue in the Republican Party.Stolberg, Sheryl Gay. Vocal Gay Republicans Upsetting Conservatives, The New York Times , June 1, 2003, p. N26. On November 22, 2004, New York Republican Governor George Pataki named Ford and the other living former Presidents as honorary members of the board rebuilding the World Trade Center. In a prerecorded embargoed interview with Bob Woodward of The Washington Post in July 2004, Ford stated that he disagreed very strongly with the Bush administrations choice of Iraqs alleged weapons of mass destruction as justification for its decision to invade Iraq, calling it a big mistake unrelated to the national security of the United States and indicating that he would not have gone to war had he been President. The details of the interview were not released until after Fords death, as he requested.Woodward, Bob. Ford Disagreed With Bush About Invading Iraq. The Washington Post , December 28, 2006. Retrieved December 28, 2006Embargoed Interview Reveals Ford Opposed Iraq War . Democracy Now Headlines for December 28, 2006. Retrieved December 28, 2006 Health problems Gerald Ford and Roy W. Hill, Rancho Mirage California Gerald Ford, Anne T. Hill, and Edgar L. McCoubrey, Rancho Mirage California Ford suffered two minor strokes at the 2000 Republican National Convention, but made a quick recovery after being admitted to Hahnemann University Hospital.Gerald Ford recovering after strokes. BBC , August 2, 2000. Retrieved December 31, 2006.Hospitalized After Suffering a Stroke, Former President Ford Is Expected to Fully Recover The New York Times , August 3, 2000. Retrieved July 5, 2008. In January 2006, he spent 11 days at the Eisenhower Medical Center near his residence at Rancho Mirage, California, for treatment of pneumonia.Former President Ford, 92, hospitalized with pneumonia. USA Today , Associated Press, January 17, 2006. Retrieved October 19, 2007. On April 23, 2006, President George W. Bush visited Ford at his home in Rancho Mirage for a little over an hour. This was Fords last public appearance and produced the last known public photos, video footage, and voice recording. While vacationing in Vail, Colorado, Ford was hospitalized for two days in July 2006 for shortness of breath.Gerald Ford released from hospital. MSNBC, Associated Press, July 26, 2006. Retrieved December 31, 2006. On August 15 he was admitted to St. Marys Hospital of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, for testing and evaluation. On August 21, it was reported that he had been fitted with a pacemaker. On August 25, he underwent an angioplasty procedure at the Mayo Clinic. On August 28, Ford was released from the hospital and returned with his wife Betty to their California home. On October 13, he was scheduled to attend the dedication of a building of his namesake, the Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at the University of Michigan, but due to poor health and on the advice of his doctors he did not attend. The previous day, Ford had entered the Eisenhower Medical Center for undisclosed tests he was released on October 16. By November 2006, he was confined to a bed in his study.Gerald Ford Dies At Age 93. CNN Transcript December 26, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2008. Death and legacy Fords casket lies in state at the United States Capitol as his widow, Betty, kneels in prayer Ford died on December 26, 2006, at his home in Rancho Mirage, California, of arteriosclerotic cerebrovascular disease and diffuse arteriosclerosis. He had endstage coronary artery disease and severe aortic stenosis and insufficiency, caused by calcific alteration of one of his heart valves.DeFrank T Write It When Im Gone, G. Putnam Sons, New York, NY, 2007. He was 93. Ford died on the 34th anniversary of President Harry Trumans death he was the last surviving member of the Warren Commission. On December 30, 2006, Ford became the 11th U.S. President to lie in state. A state funeral and memorial services was held at the National Cathedral in Washington, D.C., on January 2, 2007. After the service, Ford was interred at his Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Citizens lining outside of the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan during a public visitation of Ford. Scouting was so important to Ford that his family asked that Scouts participate in his funeral. A few selected Scouts served as ushers inside the National Cathedral. About 400 Eagle Scouts were part of the funeral procession, where they formed an honor guard as the casket went by in front of the museum. Ford selected the song to be played during his funeral procession at the U.S. Capitol.Anne E. Kornblut, Ford Arranged His Funeral to Reflect Himself and Drew in a Former Adversary, The New York Times , December 29, 2006. After his death in December 2006, the University of Michigan Marching Band played the schools fight song for him one final time, for his last ride from the Gerald R. Ford Airport in Grand Rapids, Michigan. The State of Michigan commissioned and submitted a statue of Ford to the National Statuary Hall Collection, replacing Zachariah Chandler. It was unveiled on May 3, 2011 in the Capitol Rotunda. On the proper right side is inscribed a quotation from a tribute by Thomas P. Tip ONeill, Speaker of the House at the end of Fords presidency God has been good to America, especially during difficult times. At the time of the Civil War, he gave us Abraham Lincoln. And at the time of Watergate, he gave us Gerald Ford the right man at the right time who was able to put our nation back together again. On the proper left side are words from Fords swearingin address Our constitution works. Our great republic is a government of laws and not of men. Here the people rule. Fords wife, Betty Ford, died on July 8, 2011. Like her husband, she was 93 years old when she died. Longevity On November 12, 2006, upon surpassing Ronald Reagans lifespan, Ford released his last public statementFords age at the time of his death was 93 years and 165 days, making him the longestlived U.S. President, his lifespan being 45 days longer than Ronald Reagans. He was the thirdlongestlived Vice President, falling short only of John Nance Garner, 98, and Levi P. Morton, 96. Ford also had the thirdlongest postpresidency after Jimmy Carter and Herbert Hoover . Public image President George W. Bush with Ford and his wife Betty on April 23, 2006 this is the last known public photo of Gerald Ford. Ford was the only person to hold the presidential office without being elected as either president or vicepresident. The choice of Ford to fulfill Spiro Agnews vacated role as vice president was based on Fords reputation for openness and honesty. In all the years I sat in the House, I never knew Mr. Ford to make a dishonest statement nor a statement parttrue and partfalse. He never attempted to shade a statement, and I never heard him utter an unkind word, said Martha Griffiths. The trust the American people had in him was rapidly and severely tarnished by his pardon of Nixon. Nonetheless, many grant in hindsight that he had respectably discharged with considerable dignity a great responsibility that he had not sought. His subsequent loss to Carter in 1976 has come to be seen as an honorable sacrifice he made for the nation. In spite of his athletic record and remarkable career accomplishments, Ford acquired a reputation as a clumsy, likable, and simpleminded Everyman. An incident in 1975, when he tripped while exiting Air Force One in Austria, was famously and repeatedly parodied by Chevy Chase, cementing Fords image as a klutz. Pieces of Fords common Everyman image have also been attributed to Fords inevitable comparison to Nixon, as well as his perceived Midwestern stodginess and selfdeprecation. Civic and Fraternal Organizations Ford was a member of several civic organizations, including the Junior Chamber of Commerce , American Legion, AMVETS, Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks, Sons of the Revolution, and Veterans of Foreign Wars. Freemasonry Ford was initiated into Freemasonry on September 30, 1949.The Supreme Council, Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction, USA. He later said in 1975, When I took my obligation as a master mason incidentally, with my three younger brothers I recalled the value my own father attached to that order. But I had no idea that I would ever be added to the company of the Father of our Country and 12 other members of the order who also served as Presidents of the United States. Ford was made a 33 Scottish Rite Mason on September 26, 1962. In April 1975, Ford was elected by a unanimous vote Honorary Grand Master of the International Supreme Council, Order of DeMolay, a position in which he served until January 1977. Ford received the degrees of York Rite Masonry in a special ceremony in the Oval Office on January 11, 1977, during his term as President of the United States. Honors Ford honored on U.S Postage, issue of 2007 Ford received the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award in May 1970, as well as the Silver Buffalo Award, from the Boy Scouts of America. In 1974, he also received the highest distinction of the Scout Association of Japan, the Golden Pheasant Award.reinanzakasc.o.oo7.jpkirokudocuments201405233kijilist.pdf In 1985, he received the 1985 Old Tom Morris Award from the Golf Course Superintendents Association of America, GCSAAs highest honor. In 1992, the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation awarded Ford its Lone Sailor Award for his naval service and his subsequent government service. In 1999, Ford was honored with a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs Walk of Stars. Also in 1999, Ford was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Bill Clinton. In 2001, he was presented with the John F. Kennedy Profiles in Courage Award for his decision to pardon Richard Nixon to stop the agony America was experiencing over Watergate. The following were named after Ford The Ford House Office Building in the U.S. Capitol Complex, formerly House Annex 2. Gerald R. Ford Freeway Gerald R. Ford Freeway Gerald Ford Memorial Highway, I70 in Eagle County, Colorado Gerald R. Ford International Airport in Grand Rapids, Michigan Gerald R. Ford Library in Ann Arbor, Michigan Gerald R. Ford Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, University of Michigan Gerald R. Ford Institute of Public Policy, Albion College USS Gerald R. Ford Gerald R. Ford Middle School, Grand Rapids, Michigan President Gerald R. Ford Park in Alexandria, Virginia, located in the neighborhood where Ford lived while serving as a Representative and Vice President President Ford Field Service Council, Boy Scouts of America The council where he was awarded the rank of Eagle Scout. Serves 25 counties in Western and Northern Michigan with its headquarters located in Grand Rapids, Michigan. See also List of Freemasons List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps References Bibliography fullscale biography Cannon, James. Gerald R. Ford An Honorable Life 482 pp. latest fullscale biography older fullscale biography Conley, Richard S. Presidential Influence and Minority Party Liaison on Veto Overrides New Evidence from the Ford Presidency. American Politics Research 2002 30 34 65. Fulltext in Swetswise , the major scholarly study Hersey, John Richard. The President A MinuteByMinute Account of a Week in the Life of Gerald Ford. New York Alfred A. Knopf. 1975. Hult, Karen M. and Walcott, Charles E. Empowering the White House Governance under Nixon, Ford, and Carter . University Press of Kansas, 2004. Jespersen, T. Christopher. Kissinger, Ford, and Congress the Very Bitter End in Vietnam. Pacific Historical Review 2002 71 439 473. Fulltext in University of California Swetswise Jstor and Ebsco Jespersen, T. Christopher. The Bitter End and the Lost Chance in Vietnam Congress, the Ford Administration, and the Battle over Vietnam, 1975 76. Diplomatic History 2000 24 265 293. Fulltext in Swetswise, Ingenta, Ebsco Maynard, Christopher A. Manufacturing Voter Confidence a Video Analysis of the American 1976 Presidential and Vicepresidential Debates. Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television 1997 17 523 562. Fulltext in Ingenta Primary sources , by speechwriter , by chief of staff by Secretary of State External links Official sites Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library and Museum Gerald R. Ford Presidential Foundation White House biography Media coverage Life Portrait of Gerald R. Ford, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , November 22, 1999 Other Gerald Ford A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress. Essays on Gerald Ford, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Category1913 births Category2006 deaths Category20thcentury American Episcopalians Category21stcentury American Episcopalians Category20thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican adoptees CategoryAmerican anticommunists CategoryAmerican athletepoliticians CategoryAmerican Episcopalians CategoryAmerican football centers CategoryAmerican gun control advocates CategoryAmerican military personnel of World War II CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of the Vietnam War CategoryAmerican shooting survivors CategoryAssassination attempt survivors CategoryBurials in Michigan CategoryCongressional Gold Medal recipients CategoryDistinguished Eagle Scouts CategoryEast Grand Rapids, Michigan CategoryGerald Ford family CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryLawyers from Alexandria, Virginia CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Michigan CategoryMembers of the Warren Commission CategoryMichigan lawyers CategoryMichigan Republicans CategoryMichigan Wolverines football players CategoryMilitary personnel from Michigan CategoryMinority Leaders of the United States House of Representatives CategoryNixon administration cabinet members CategoryNixon administration personnel involved in the Watergate scandal CategoryPoliticians from Alexandria, Virginia CategoryPeople from Kent County, Michigan CategoryPeople from Rancho Mirage, California CategoryPlayers of American football from Michigan CategoryPoliticians from Grand Rapids, Michigan CategoryPoliticians from Omaha, Nebraska CategoryPresidential Medal of Freedom recipients CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRecipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryUniversity of Michigan Law School alumni CategoryUnited States Navy officers CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1976 CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryYale Bulldogs football coaches CategoryYale Law Schoolalumni
John Fitzgerald Kennedy , commonly referred to by his initials JFK , was an American statesman who served as the 35th President of the United States from January 1961 until his assassination in November 1963. Kennedy served at the height of the Cold War, and much of his presidency focused on managing relations with the Soviet Union. He was a member of the Democratic Party who represented Massachusetts in the United States House of Representatives and the United States Senate prior to becoming president. Kennedy was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, to Joseph P. Kennedy, Sr. and Rose Kennedy. A scion of the Kennedy family, he graduated from Harvard University in 1940 before joining the United States Naval Reserve the following year. During World War II, Kennedy commanded a series of PT boats in the Pacific theater and earned the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his service. After the war, Kennedy represented Massachusettss 11th congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1947 until 1953. He was subsequently elected to the U.S. Senate and served as the junior Senator from Massachusetts from 1953 until 1960. While serving in the Senate, he published Profiles in Courage , which won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography. In the 1960 presidential election, Kennedy narrowly defeated Republican opponent Richard Nixon, who was the incumbent Vice President. Kennedys time in office was marked by high tensions with Communist states in the Cold War. He increased the number of American military advisers in South Vietnam by a factor of 18 over President Dwight D. Eisenhower. In April 1961, he authorized a failed jointCIA attempt to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro in the Bay of Pigs Invasion.de Quesada, Alejandro The Bay of Pigs Cuba 1961 p. 17 He subsequently rejected plans by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to orchestrate falseflag attacks on American soil in order to gain public approval for a war against Cuba. In October 1962, U.S. spy planes discovered that Soviet missile bases had been deployed in Cuba the resulting period of tensions, termed the Cuban Missile Crisis, nearly resulted in the breakout of a global thermonuclear conflict. Domestically, Kennedy presided over the establishment of the Peace Corps and supported the Civil Rights Movement, but he was largely unsuccessful in passing his New Frontier domestic policies. Kennedy continues to rank highly in historians polls of U.S. presidents and with the general public. His average approval rating of 70 is the highest of any president in Gallups history of systematically measuring job approval. On November 22, 1963, Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas. Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the crime, but he was never prosecuted due to his murder by Jack Ruby two days later. Pursuant to the Presidential Succession Act, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson was sworn in as president later that day. The FBI and the Warren Commission officially concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin, but various groups believed that Kennedy was the victim of a conspiracy. After Kennedys death, many of his proposals were enacted, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Revenue Act of 1964. Early life and education John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born on May 29, 1917, at 83 Beals Street in Brookline, Massachusetts, to businessmanpolitician Joseph Patrick Joe Kennedy and philanthropistsocialite Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald Kennedy. His grandfathers P. J. Kennedy and Boston Mayor John F. Fitzgerald were both Massachusetts politicians. All four of his grandparents were children of Irish immigrants. Kennedy had an elder brother, Joseph Jr., and seven younger siblings Rosemary, Kathleen, Eunice, Patricia, Robert, Jean, and Ted. Kennedys birthplace in Brookline, Massachusetts Kennedy lived in Brookline for the first decade of his life and attended the Edward Devotion School, the Noble and Greenough Lower School, and the Dexter School through 4th grade. Joe Kennedys business had kept him away from the family for long stretches of time, and his ventures were concentrated on Wall Street and Hollywood. In September 1927, the family moved from Boston to Riverdale, Bronx, New York. Young John attended the lower campus of Riverdale Country School, a private school for boys, from 5th to 7th grade. Two years later, the family moved to suburban Bronxville, New York, where Kennedy was a member of Boy Scout Troop 2 and attended St. Josephs Church. The Kennedy family spent summers and early autumns at their home in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, and Christmas and Easter holidays at their winter home in Palm Beach, Florida, later purchased in 1933. In September 1930, Kennedy then 13 years old attended the Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut, for 8th grade. In April 1931, he had an appendectomy, after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home. The Kennedy family at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, in 1931 with Jack at top left in white shirt. Ted was born the following year. In September 1931, Kennedy attended Choate, a boarding school in Wallingford, Connecticut, for 9th through 12th grade. His older brother Joe Jr. had already been at Choate for two years and was a football player and leading student. He spent his first years at Choate in his older brothers shadow, and compensated with rebellious behavior that attracted a coterie. They carried out their most notorious stunt by exploding a toilet seat with a powerful firecracker. In the ensuing chapel assembly, the strict headmaster, George St. John, brandished the toilet seat and spoke of certain muckers who would spit in our sea. The defiant Kennedy took the cue and named his group The Muckers Club, which included roommate and friend Kirk LeMoyne Lem Billings. During his Choate years, Kennedy was beset by health problems that culminated with his emergency hospitalization at New Haven Hospital in 1934, where doctors thought he might have had leukemia. In June 1934, he was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota the ultimate diagnosis there was colitis. Kennedy graduated from Choate in June of the following year, finishing 64th in a class of 112 students. He had been the business manager of the school yearbook and was voted the most likely to succeed. In September 1935, Kennedy made his first trip abroad when he traveled to London with his parents and his sister Kathleen. He intended to study under Harold Laski at the London School of Economics , as his older brother had done. Illhealth forced his return to America in October of that year, when he enrolled late and spent six weeks at Princeton University. He was then hospitalized for observation at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston. He convalesced further at the Kennedy winter home in Palm Beach, then spent the spring of 1936 working as a ranch hand on the Jay Six cattle ranch outside Benson, Arizona. It is reported that ranchman Jack Speiden worked both brothers very hard. In 1935, Kennedy briefly attended Princeton University, but had to leave after two months due to a gastrointestinal illness. Later, in September 1936, Kennedy enrolled at Harvard College and his application essay stated The reasons that I have for wishing to go to Harvard are several. I feel that Harvard can give me a better background and a better liberal education than any other university. I have always wanted to go there, as I have felt that it is not just another college, but is a university with something definite to offer. Then too, I would like to go to the same college as my father. To be a Harvard man is an enviable distinction, and one that I sincerely hope I shall attain. He produced that years annual Freshman Smoker, called by a reviewer an elaborate entertainment, which included in its cast outstanding personalities of the radio, screen and sports world. He tried out for the football, golf, and swimming teams and earned a spot on the varsity swimming team. Kennedy also sailed in the Star class and won the 1936 Nantucket Sound Star Championship. In July 1937, Kennedy sailed to France taking his convertible and spent ten weeks driving through Europe with Billings. In June 1938, Kennedy sailed overseas with his father and older brother to work at the American embassy in London, where his father was President Franklin D. Roosevelts U.S. Ambassador to the Court of St. Jamess. In 1939, Kennedy toured Europe, the Soviet Union, the Balkans, and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis. He then went to Czechoslovakia and Germany before returning to London on September 1, 1939, the day that Germany invaded Poland to mark the beginning of World War II. Two days later, the family was in the House of Commons for speeches endorsing the United Kingdoms declaration of war on Germany. Kennedy was sent as his fathers representative to help with arrangements for American survivors of the SS Athenia before flying back to the U.S. from Foynes, Ireland, to Port Washington, New York, on his first transatlantic flight. As an upperclassman at Harvard, Kennedy became a more serious student and developed an interest in political philosophy. In his junior year, he made the Deans List. In 1940, Kennedy completed his thesis, Appeasement in Munich, about British participation in the Munich Agreement. The thesis became a bestseller under the title Why England Slept . In addition to addressing Britains failure to strengthen its military in the leadup to World War II, the book also called for an AngloAmerican alliance against the rising totalitarian powers. While Kennedy became increasingly supportive of U.S. intervention in World War II, his fathers isolationist beliefs resulted in the latters dismissal as ambassador to the United Kingdom, creating a split between the Kennedy and Roosevelt families. In 1940, Kennedy graduated cum laude from Harvard College with a Bachelor of Arts in government, concentrating on international affairs. That fall, he enrolled at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and audited classes there. In early 1941, Kennedy left and helped his father write a memoir of his three years as an American ambassador. He then traveled throughout South America his itinerary included Colombia, Ecuador and Peru. U.S. Navy Reserve In 1940, Kennedy attempted to enter the armys Officer Candidate School, but he was medically disqualified due to his chronic lower back problems. He exercised for months to straighten his back. On September 24, 1941, with the help of the director of the Office of Naval Intelligence who was the former naval attach to Joseph Kennedy Kennedy joined the United States Naval Reserve. He was commissioned an ensign on October 26, 1941, and joined the staff of the Office of Naval Intelligence in Washington, D.C. Lieutenant Kennedy with his PT109 crew, 1943 In January 1942, Kennedy was assigned to the ONI field office at Headquarters, Sixth Naval District, in Charleston, South Carolina. He attended the Naval Reserve Officer Training School at Northwestern University in Chicago, Illinois, from July 27 to September 27 and then voluntarily entered the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center in Melville, Rhode Island. On October 10, he was promoted to lieutenant junior grade. He completed his training on December 2 and was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron FOUR. His first command was PT101 from December 7, 1942, until February 23, 1943 It was a PT boat used for training while Kennedy was an instructor at Melville. He then led three Huckins PT boats PT98 , PT99 , and PT101 , which were being relocated from MTBRON 4 in Melville, Rhode Island, back to Jacksonville, Florida, and the new MTBRON 14 . During the trip south, he was hospitalized briefly in Jacksonville after diving into the cold water to unfoul a propeller. Thereafter, Kennedy was assigned duty in Panama and later in the Pacific theater, where he eventually commanded two more patrol torpedo boats. PT109 and PT59 Kennedy on his navy patrol boat, the PT109 , 1943 In April 1943, he was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron TWO. On April 24, Kennedy took command of PT109 which was based at Tulagi Island in the Solomon Islands. On the night of August 1 2, PT109 , on its 31st mission, was performing nighttime patrols near New Georgia in the Solomon Islands with PT162 and PT169 . Kennedy spotted a Japanese destroyer nearby and attempted to turn to attack, when PT109 was rammed suddenly at an angle and cut in half by the destroyer Amagiri , costing two PT109 crew members their lives. Kennedy gathered around the wreckage his surviving ten crew members including those injured, to vote on whether to fight or surrender. Kennedy stated Theres nothing in the book about a situation like this. A lot of you men have families and some of you have children. What do you want to do I have nothing to lose. Shunning surrender, the men swam towards a small island three miles away. Despite reinjuring his back in the collision, Kennedy towed a badly burned crewman through the water to the island with a life jacket strap clenched between his teeth, and later to a second island, where his crew was subsequently rescued on August 8. Kennedy and Ensign Leonard Thom, his executive officer on PT109 , were both later awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for heroism and the Purple Heart Medal for injuries. On September 1, 1943, Kennedy returned to duty and took command of the PT59 , a PT boat that had been converted into a gunboat. In October, Kennedy was promoted to lieutenant. On November 2, PT59 , which included three former PT109 crew members, took part with another boat in the successful rescue of 87 marines stranded on two rescue landing craft on the Warrior River at Choiseul Island, which was held by the Japanese. Under doctors orders, Kennedy was relieved of his command of PT59 on November 18, and he returned to the United States in early January 1944. After receiving treatment for his back injury, he was released from active duty in late 1944. Beginning in January 1945, Kennedy spent three more months recovering from his back injury at Castle Hot Springs, a resort and temporary military hospital in Arizona. Kennedy was in Chelsea Naval Hospital from May to December 1944. On June 12, he was presented the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his heroic actions on August 1 2, 1943, and the Purple Heart Medal for his back injury on PT109 , on August 1, 1943 . After the war, Kennedy felt that the medal he had received for heroism was not a combat award and asked that he be reconsidered for the Silver Star Medal for which he had been recommended initially. . In 1950, The Department of the Navy offered Kennedy a Bronze Star Medal in recognition of his meritorious service, but he would have to return his Navy and Marine Corps Medal in order to receive it. He declined the medal. In 1959, the Navy again offered him the Bronze Star. Kennedy responded, repeating his original request concerning the award. He received the same response from the Navy as he had in 1950. The Navy said his actions were a lifesaving case. Kennedys two original medals are currently on display at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. On August 12, 1944, Kennedys older brother, Joe Jr., a Navy pilot, was killed after volunteering for a special and hazardous air mission. His explosiveladen plane was destroyed when the planes bombs detonated prematurely as the aircraft was flying over the English Channel. On March 1, 1945, Kennedy retired from the Navy Reserve on physical disability and was honorably discharged with the full rank of lieutenant. When asked later how he became a war hero, Kennedy joked It was easy. They cut my PT boat in half. Military awards Kennedys military decorations and awards include the Navy and Marine Corps Medal Purple Heart Medal American Defense Service Medal American Campaign Medal AsiaticPacific Campaign Medal with three bronze stars and the World War II Victory Medal. Navy and Marine Corps Medal Purple Heart American Defense Service Medal American Campaign Medal AsiaticPacific Campaign Medalwith three stars World War II Victory Medal Navy and Marine Corps Medal citation Postnaval service In April 1945, Kennedys father, who was a friend of William Randolph Hearst, arranged a position for his son as a special correspondent for Hearst Newspapers the assignment kept Kennedys name in the public eye and exposed him to journalism as a possible career. He worked as a correspondent that May, covering the Potsdam Conference and other events. Congressional career Because his eldest brother had been the familys political standardbearer, and had been tapped by his father to seek the Presidency, his death in 1944 changed that course and the task now fell to the second eldest of the Kennedy siblings John F. Kennedy. House of Representatives At the urging of Kennedys father, U.S. Representative James Michael Curley vacated his seat in the strongly Democratic 11th Congressional district in Massachusetts to become mayor of Boston in 1946. With his father financing and running his campaign, Kennedy won the Democratic primary with 12 percent of the vote, defeating ten other candidates. Though Republicans took control of the House in the 1946 elections, Kennedy defeated his Republican opponent in the general election, taking 73 percent of the vote. Along with Richard Nixon and Joseph McCarthy, Kennedy was one of several World War II veterans first elected to Congress that year. He served in the House for six years, joining the influential Education and Labor Committee and the Veterans Affairs Committee. He concentrated his attention on international affairs, supporting the Truman Doctrine as the appropriate response to the emerging Cold War. He also supported public housing and opposed the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, which restricted the power of labor unions. Though not as vocal an anticommunist as McCarthy, Kennedy supported the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, which required Communists to register with the government, and he deplored the Loss of China. Senate Kennedy lying on a gurney following spinal surgery, accompanied by Jackie, December 1954 Kennedy endorsing Adlai Stevenson II for the presidential nomination at the 1956 Democratic National Convention in Chicago As early as 1949, Kennedy began preparing to run for the Senate in 1952 against Republican threeterm incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. Joseph Kennedy again financed and managed his sons candidacy, while John Kennedys younger brother Robert Kennedy emerged as an important member of the campaign. In the presidential election, General Dwight D. Eisenhower carried Massachusetts by a margin of 208,000 votes, but Kennedy defeated Lodge by 70,000 votes for the Senate seat. The following year, he married Jacqueline Bouvier. Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the next two years. Often absent from the Senate, he was at times critically ill and received Catholic last rites. During his convalescence in 1956, he published Profiles in Courage , a book about U.S. senators who risked their careers for their personal beliefs, for which he won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957. Rumors that this work was cowritten by his close adviser and speechwriter, Ted Sorensen, were confirmed in Sorensens 2008 autobiography. At the 1956 Democratic National Convention, Kennedy gave the nominating speech for the partys presidential nominee, Adlai Stevenson II. Stevenson let the convention select the Vice Presidential nominee. Kennedy finished second in the balloting, losing to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee but receiving national exposure as a result. One of the matters demanding Kennedys attention in the Senate was President Eisenhowers bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957. Kennedy cast a procedural vote on this, which was considered by some as an appeasement of Southern Democratic opponents of the bill. Kennedy did vote for Title III of the act, which would have given the Attorney General powers to enjoin, but Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson agreed to let the provision die as a compromise measure. Kennedy also voted for Title IV, termed the Jury Trial Amendment. Many civil rights advocates at the time criticized that vote as one which would weaken the act. A final compromise bill, which Kennedy supported, was passed in September 1957. Jack Paar interviews Senator Kennedy on The Tonight Show . In 1958, Kennedy was reelected to a second term in the Senate, defeating his Republican opponent, Boston lawyer Vincent J. Celeste, by a wide margin of 874,608 votes this represented the largest ever margin in Massachusetts politics. It was during his reelection campaign that Kennedys press secretary at the time, Robert E. Thompson, put together a film entitled The U.S. Senator John F. Kennedy Story , which exhibited a day in the life of the Senator and showcased his family life as well as the inner workings of his office. It was the most comprehensive film produced about Kennedy up to that time. In the aftermath of his reelection, Kennedy began preparing to run for president in 1960. While Kennedys father was a strong supporter of Senator Joseph McCarthy, McCarthy was also a friend of the Kennedy family. As well, Bobby Kennedy worked for McCarthys subcommittee, and McCarthy dated Kennedy sister Patricia. In 1954, the Senate voted to censure McCarthy and Kennedy drafted a speech supporting the censure. However, it was not delivered because Kennedy was hospitalized at the time. The speech had the potential of putting Kennedy in the position of participating procedurally by pairing his vote against that of another senator. Although Kennedy never indicated how he would have voted, the episode damaged his support among members of the liberal community, including Eleanor Roosevelt, in the 1956 and 1960 elections. 1960 presidential election The Kennedys campaigning in Appleton, Wisconsin, March 1960 On January 2, 1960, Kennedy announced his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination. Though some questioned Kennedys youth and experience, his charisma and eloquence earned him numerous supporters. His greatest obstacle to winning the nomination may have been his religion, as many Americans held antiCatholic attitudes, but his vocal support of the separation of church and state helped to defuse the issue. His religion also helped him win a devoted following among many Catholic voters. Kennedy faced several potential challengers for the Democratic nomination, including Adlai Stevenson, Senator Hubert Humphrey, and Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson. Kennedy traveled widely to build his support among Democratic elites and voters. At the time, party officials controlled most of the delegates, but several states also held primaries, and Kennedy sought to win several primaries to boost his chances of winning the nomination. In his first major test, Kennedy won the Wisconsin primary, effectively ending Humphreys hopes of winning the presidency. Nonetheless, Kennedy and Humphrey faced each other in a competitive West Virginia primary in which Kennedy could not benefit from a Catholic bloc, as he had in Wisconsin. Kennedy won the West Virginia primary, impressing many in the party, but at the start of the 1960 Democratic National Convention, it was unclear whether he would win the nomination. Kennedy and Richard Nixon participate in the first televised presidential debate, Washington, D.C., 1960. Entering the convention, Kennedy had the most delegates, but not enough to ensure he would win the nomination. Stevenson, the 1952 and 1956 presidential nominee, remained very popular in the party, while Johnson also hoped to win the nomination with the support of party leaders. Kennedys candidacy also faced opposition from former president Harry S. Truman, who worried about Kennedys lack of experience. Knowing that a second ballot could result in the nomination of Johnson or another candidate, Kennedys wellorganized campaign was able to earn the support of just enough delegates to win the presidential nomination on the first ballot. Over the opposition of his brother and some of his liberal supporters, Kennedy chose Johnson as his vice presidential nominee, believing that the Texan Senator could help him win support in the South. Accepting the presidential nomination, Kennedy gave his wellknown New Frontier speech, saying For the problems are not all solved and the battles are not all won and we stand today on the edge of a New Frontier.... But the New Frontier of which I speak is not a set of promises it is a set of challenges. It sums up not what I intend to offer the American people, but what I intend to ask of them. Outgoing President Dwight D. Eisenhower meets with Presidentelect John F. Kennedy on December 6, 1960 At the start of the fall general election campaign, Republican nominee Richard Nixon, the incumbent vice president, held a sixpoint lead in the polls. Major issues included how to get the economy moving again, Kennedys Roman Catholicism, the Cuban Revolution, and whether the Soviet space and missile programs had surpassed those of the U.S. To address fears that his being Catholic would impact his decisionmaking, he famously told the Greater Houston Ministerial Association on September 12, 1960 I am not the Catholic candidate for president. I am the Democratic Party candidate for president who also happens to be a Catholic. I do not speak for my Church on public matters and the Church does not speak for me. Kennedy questioned rhetorically whether onequarter of Americans were relegated to secondclass citizenship just because they were Catholic, and once stated that No one asked me my religion the Navy in the South Pacific. In September and October, Kennedy squared off against Nixon in the first televised presidential debates in U.S. history. During these programs, Nixon had a sore, injured leg, and his five oclock shadow was perspiring as he looked tense and uncomfortable. Kennedy, on the other hand, chose to avail himself of makeup services and appeared relaxed, which led the huge television audience to favor him as the winner. Radio listeners either thought that Nixon had won or that the debates were a draw. The debates are now considered a milestone in American political history the point at which the medium of television began to play a dominant role in politics. 1960 electoral vote results Kennedys campaign gained momentum after the first debate, and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls. On November 8, Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the 20th century. In the national popular vote, by most accounts, Kennedy led Nixon by just twotenths of one percent , while in the Electoral College, he won 303 votes to Nixons 219 . Fourteen electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to support Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement they voted for Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia, as did an elector from Oklahoma. Kennedy became the youngest person ever elected to the presidency, though Theodore Roosevelt was slightly younger when he took office after William McKinleys assassination in 1901. Presidency John F. Kennedy takes the Presidential oath of office administered by Chief Justice Earl Warren on January 20, 1961, at the Capitol. John F. Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th president at noon on January 20, 1961. In his inaugural address he spoke of the need for all Americans to be active citizens, famously saying Ask not what your country can do for you ask what you can do for your country. He asked the nations of the world to join together to fight what he called the common enemies of man tyranny, poverty, disease, and war itself. He added All this will not be finished in the first one hundred days. Nor will it be finished in the first one thousand days, nor in the life of this Administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet. But let us begin. In closing, he expanded on his desire for greater internationalism Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you. The address reflected Kennedys confidence that his administration would chart an historically significant course in both domestic policy and foreign affairs. The contrast between this optimistic vision and the pressures of managing daily political realities at home and abroad would be one of the main tensions running through the early years of his administration. John F. Kennedy speaking at Rice University in Houston on September 12, 1962. Lyndon Johnson can be seen behind him. Kennedy brought to the White House a contrast in organization compared to the decisionmaking structure of formerGeneral Eisenhower and he wasted no time in scrapping Eisenhowers methods. Kennedy preferred the organizational structure of a wheel with all the spokes leading to the president. He was ready and willing to make the increased number of quick decisions required in such an environment. He selected a mixture of experienced and inexperienced people to serve in his cabinet. We can learn our jobs together, he stated. Much to the chagrin of his economic advisors who wanted him to reduce taxes, Kennedy quickly agreed to a balanced budget pledge. This was needed in exchange for votes to expand the membership of the House Rules Committee in order to give the Democrats a majority in setting the legislative agenda. Kennedy focused on immediate and specific issues facing the administration, and quickly voiced his impatience with pondering of deeper meanings. Deputy National Security Advisor Walt Whitman Rostow once began a diatribe about the growth of communism, and Kennedy abruptly cut him off, asking, What do you want me to do about that today Kennedy approved Defense Secretary Robert McNamaras controversial decision to award the contract for the F111 TFX fighterbomber to General Dynamics over Boeing . At the request of Senator Henry Jackson, Senator John McClellan held 46 days of mostly closeddoor hearings before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations investigating the TFX contract from February to November 1963. During the summer of 1962, Kennedy had a secret taping system set up in the White House, most likely to aid his future memoir. It recorded many conversations with Kennedy and his Cabinet members, including those in relation to the Cuban Missile Crisis. Foreign policy Foreign trips of John F. Kennedy during his presidency President Kennedys foreign policy was dominated by American confrontations with the Soviet Union, manifested by proxy contests in the early stage of the Cold War. In 1961, Kennedy anxiously anticipated a summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. He started off on the wrong foot by reacting aggressively to a routine Khrushchev speech on Cold War confrontation in early 1961. The speech was intended for domestic audiences in the Soviet Union, but Kennedy interpreted it as a personal challenge. His mistake helped raise tensions going into the Vienna Summit of June 1961. Kennedy with Kwame Nkrumah, the first head of an independent Ghana, March 1961 On the way to the summit, Kennedy stopped in Paris to meet Charles de Gaulle, who advised him to ignore Khrushchevs abrasive style. The French president feared the United States presumed influence in Europe. Nevertheless, de Gaulle was quite impressed with the young president and his family. Kennedy picked up on this in his speech in Paris, saying that he would be remembered as the man who accompanied Jackie Kennedy to Paris. On June 4, 1961, the president met with Khrushchev in Vienna and left the meetings angry and disappointed that he had allowed the premier to bully him, despite the warnings he had received. Khrushchev, for his part, was impressed with the presidents intelligence, but thought him weak. Kennedy did succeed in conveying the bottom line to Khrushchev on the most sensitive issue before them, a proposed treaty between Moscow and East Berlin. He made it clear that any such treaty which interfered with U.S access rights in West Berlin would be regarded as an act of war. Shortly after the president returned home, the U.S.S.R. announced its intention to sign a treaty with East Berlin, abrogating any thirdparty occupation rights in either sector of the city. Kennedy, depressed and angry, assumed that his only option was to prepare the country for nuclear war, which he personally thought had a oneinfive chance of occurring. In the weeks immediately after the Vienna summit, more than 20,000 people fled from East Berlin to the western sector in reaction to statements from the USSR. Kennedy began intensive meetings on the Berlin issue, where Dean Acheson took the lead in recommending a military buildup alongside NATO allies. In a July 1961 speech, Kennedy announced his decision to add 3.25billion to the defense budget, along with over 200,000 additional troops, stating that an attack on West Berlin would be taken as an attack on the U.S. The speech received an 85 approval rating. Kennedy with the Italian Prime Minister Amintore Fanfani, at the White House, in 1963 The following month, the Soviet Union and East Berlin began blocking any further passage of East Berliners into West Berlin and erected barbed wire fences across the city, which were quickly upgraded to the Berlin Wall. Kennedys initial reaction was to ignore this, as long as free access from West to East Berlin continued. This course was altered when it was learned that West Berliners had lost confidence in the defense of their position by the United States. Kennedy sent Vice President Johnson, along with a host of military personnel, in convoy through West Germany, including Sovietarmed checkpoints, to demonstrate the continued commitment of the U.S. to West Berlin. Kennedy gave a speech at Saint Anselm College on May 5, 1960, regarding Americas conduct in the emerging Cold War. The address detailed how American foreign policy should be conducted towards African nations, noting a hint of support for modern African nationalism by saying that For we, too, founded a new nation on revolt from colonial rule. Cuba and the Bay of Pigs Invasion The President and Vice President take a leisurely stroll on the White House grounds The prior Eisenhower administration had created a plan to overthrow Fidel Castros regime in Cuba. The plan, led by the Central Intelligence Agency , with help from the U.S. military, was for an invasion of Cuba by a counterrevolutionary insurgency composed of U.S.trained, antiCastro Cuban exilesGleijeses , pp. 9 19 led by CIA paramilitary officers. The intention was to invade Cuba and instigate an uprising among the Cuban people in hopes of removing Castro from power. Kennedy approved the final invasion plan on April 4, 1961. The Bay of Pigs Invasion began on April 17, 1961. Fifteen hundred U.S.trained Cubans, called Brigade 2506, landed on the island. No U.S. air support was provided. Allen Dulles, director of the CIA, later stated that they thought the president would authorize any action required for success once the troops were on the ground. By April 19, 1961, the Cuban government had captured or killed the invading exiles, and Kennedy was forced to negotiate for the release of the 1,189 survivors. After twenty months, Cuba released the captured exiles in exchange for 53million worth of food and medicine. The incident made Castro wary of the U.S. and led him to believe that another invasion would occur.Jean Edward Smith, Bay of Pigs The Unanswered Questions, The Nation , April 13, 1964. According to biographer Richard Reeves, Kennedy focused primarily on the political repercussions of the plan rather than military considerations. When it failed, he was convinced that the plan was a setup to make him look bad. He took responsibility for the failure, saying We got a big kick in the leg and we deserved it. But maybe well learn something from it. In late 1961, the White House formed the Special Group , headed by Robert Kennedy and including Edward Lansdale, Secretary Robert McNamara, and others. The groups objective to overthrow Castro via espionage, sabotage, and other covert tactics was never pursued. Cuban Missile Crisis Meeting with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna in 1961 On October 14, 1962, CIA U2 spy planes took photographs of intermediaterange ballistic missile sites being built in Cuba by the Soviets. The photos were shown to Kennedy on October 16 a consensus was reached that the missiles were offensive in nature and thus posed an immediate nuclear threat. Kennedy faced a dilemma if the U.S. attacked the sites, it might lead to nuclear war with the U.S.S.R., but if the U.S. did nothing, it would be faced with the increased threat from closerange nuclear weapons. The U.S. would also appear to the world as less committed to the defense of the hemisphere. On a personal level, Kennedy needed to show resolve in reaction to Khrushchev, especially after the Vienna summit. More than a third of the members of the National Security Council favored an unannounced air assault on the missile sites, but for some of them this conjured up an image of Pearl Harbor in reverse. There was also some concern from the international community , that the assault plan was an overreaction in light of the fact that PGM19 Jupiter missiles had been placed in Italy and Turkey by Eisenhower in 1958. There could also be no assurance that the assault would be 100 effective. In concurrence with a majorityvote of the NSC, Kennedy decided on a naval quarantine. On October 22 he dispatched a message to Khrushchev and announced the decision on TV. The U.S. Navy would stop and inspect all Soviet ships arriving off Cuba, beginning October 24. The Organization of American States gave unanimous support to the removal of the missiles. The president exchanged two sets of letters with Khrushchev, to no avail. United Nations Secretary General U Thant requested that both parties reverse their decisions and enter a coolingoff period. Khrushchev agreed, Kennedy did not. One Sovietflagged ship was stopped and boarded. On October 28 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missile sites, subject to UN inspections. The U.S. publicly promised never to invade Cuba and privately agreed to remove its Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey, which were by then obsolete and had been supplanted by submarines equipped with UGM27 Polaris missiles. This crisis brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point before or since. In the end, the humanity of the two men prevailed. The crisis improved the image of American willpower and the presidents credibility. Kennedys approval rating increased from 66 to 77 immediately thereafter. Latin America and communism Kennedy with Chilean President Jorge Alessandri, on an official visit in December 1962 Arguing that those who make peaceful revolution impossible, will make violent revolution inevitable,JFKs Address on the First Anniversary of the Alliance for Progress, White House reception for diplomatic cors of the Latin American republics, March 13, 1962. Public Papers of the Presidents John F. Kennedy , p. 223. Kennedy sought to contain the perceived threat of communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress, which sent aid to some countries and sought greater human rights standards in the region. He worked closely with Governor of Puerto Rico Luis Muoz Marn for the development of the Alliance of Progress, and began working towards the autonomy of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. When the president took office, the Eisenhower administration, through the CIA, had begun formulating plans for the assassination of Castro in Cuba and Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic. Kennedy privately instructed the CIA that any such planning must include plausible deniability by the U.S. His public position was in opposition. In June 1961 the Dominican Republics leader was assassinated in the days following the event, Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles led a cautious reaction by the nation. Robert Kennedy, who saw an opportunity for the U.S., called Bowles a gutless bastard to his face. Peace Corps In one of his first presidential acts, Kennedy asked Congress to create the Peace Corps. His brotherinlaw, Sargent Shriver, was its first director. Through this program, Americans volunteered to help underdeveloped nations in areas such as education, farming, health care, and construction. The organization grew to 5,000 members by March 1963 and 10,000 the following year. Since 1961, over 200,000 Americans have joined the Peace Corps, serving in 139 countries. Southeast Asia When briefing Kennedy, Eisenhower emphasized that the communist threat in Southeast Asia required priority Eisenhower considered Laos to be the cork in the bottle in regards to the regional threat. In March 1961, Kennedy voiced a change in policy from supporting a free Laos to a neutral Laos, indicating privately that Vietnam, and not Laos, should be deemed Americas tripwire for communisms spread in the area. In May, he dispatched Lyndon Johnson to meet with South Vietnams President Ngo Dinh Diem. Johnson assured Diem more aid to mold a fighting force that could resist the communists. Kennedy announced a change of policy from support to partnership with Diem to defeat of communism in South Vietnam. During his administration, Kennedy continued policies that provided political and economic support, and military advice and support, to the South Vietnamese government. Late in 1961, the Viet Cong began assuming a predominant presence, initially seizing the provincial capital of Phuoc Vinh. Kennedy increased the number of military advisors and special forces in the area, from 11,000 in 1962 to 16,000 by late 1963, but he was reluctant to order a fullscale deployment of troops. A year and three months later on March 8, 1965, his successor, President Lyndon Johnson, committed the first combat troops to Vietnam and greatly escalated U.S. involvement, with forces reaching 184,000 that year and 536,000 in 1968. In late 1961, President Kennedy sent Roger Hilsman, then director of the State Departments Bureau of Intelligence and Research, to assess the situation in Vietnam. There, Hilsman met Sir Robert Thompson, head of the British Advisory Mission to South Vietnam and the Strategic Hamlet Program was formed. It was approved by Kennedy and South Vietnam President Ngo Dinh Diem. It was implemented in early 1962 and involved some forced relocation, village internment, and segregation of rural South Vietnamese into new communities where the peasantry would be isolated from Communist insurgents. It was hoped that these new communities would provide security for the peasants and strengthen the tie between them and the central government. By November 1963 the program waned and officially ended in 1964. In early 1962, Kennedy formally authorized escalated involvement when he signed the National Security Action Memorandum Subversive Insurgency . Operation Ranch Hand, a largescale aerial defoliation effort, began on the roadsides of South Vietnam.. Depending on which assessment Kennedy accepted there had been zero or modest progress in countering the increase in communist aggression in return for an expanded U.S. involvement. Kennedy with future Australian Prime Minister Harold Holt in the Oval Office in 1963 In April 1963, Kennedy assessed the situation in Vietnam We dont have a prayer of staying in Vietnam. Those people hate us. They are going to throw our asses out of there at any point. But I cant give up that territory to the communists and get the American people to reelect me. On August 21, just as the new U.S. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. arrived, Diem and his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu ordered South Vietnam forces, funded and trained by the CIA, to quell Buddhist demonstrations. The crackdowns heightened expectations of a coup dtat to remove Diem with his brother, Nhu. Lodge was instructed to try to get Diem and Nhu to step down and leave the country. Diem would not listen to Lodge. Cable 243 , dated August 24, followed, declaring Washington would no longer tolerate Nhus actions, and Lodge was ordered to pressure Diem to remove Nhu. Lodge concluded that the only option was to get the South Vietnamese generals to overthrow Diem and Nhu. At weeks end, orders were sent to Saigon and throughout Washington to destroy all coup cables. At the same time, the first formal antiVietnam war sentiment was expressed by U.S. clergy from the Ministers Vietnam Committee. A White House meeting in September was indicative of the different ongoing appraisals the president was given updated assessments after personal inspections on the ground by the Department of Defense and the State Department . Krulak said that the military fight against the communists was progressing and being won, while Mendenhall stated that the country was civilly being lost to any U.S. influence. Kennedy reacted, saying Did you two gentlemen visit the same country The president was unaware that the two men were at such odds that they had not spoken to each other on the return flight. In October 1963, the president appointed Defense Secretary McNamara and General Maxwell D. Taylor to a Vietnam mission in another effort to synchronize the information and formulation of policy. The objective of the McNamara Taylor mission emphasized the importance of getting to the bottom of the differences in reporting from U.S. representatives in Vietnam. In meetings with McNamara, Taylor, and Lodge, Diem again refused to agree to governing measures, helping to dispel McNamaras previous optimism about Diem. Taylor and McNamara were enlightened by Vietnams vice president, Nguyen Ngoc Tho , who in detailed terms obliterated Taylors information that the military was succeeding in the countryside. At Kennedys insistence, the mission report contained a recommended schedule for troop withdrawals 1,000 by years end and complete withdrawal in 1965, something the NSC considered a strategic fantasy. In late October, intelligence wires again reported that a coup against the Diem government was afoot. The source, Vietnamese General Duong Van Minh , wanted to know the U.S. position. Kennedy instructed Lodge to offer covert assistance to the coup, excluding assassination. On November 1, 1963, South Vietnamese generals, led by Big Minh, overthrew the Diem government, arresting and then killing Diem and Nhu. Kennedy was shocked by the deaths. News of the coup led to renewed confidence initially both in America and in South Vietnam that the war might be won. McGeorge Bundy drafted a National Security Action Memo to present to Kennedy upon his return from Dallas. It reiterated the resolve to fight communism in Vietnam, with increasing military and economic aid and expansion of operations into Laos and Cambodia. Before leaving for Dallas, Kennedy told Michael Forrestal that after the first of the year... wanted an in depth study of every possible option, including how to get out of there... to review this whole thing from the bottom to the top. When asked what he thought the president meant, Forrestal said, it was devils advocate stuff. Historians disagree on whether Vietnam would have escalated if Kennedy not been assassinated and had won reelection in 1964. Fueling the debate were statements made by Secretary of Defense McNamara in the film The Fog of War that Kennedy was strongly considering pulling the United States out of Vietnam after the 1964 election. The film also contains a tape recording of Lyndon Johnson stating that Kennedy was planning to withdraw, a position in which Johnson disagreed. Kennedy had signed National Security Action Memorandum 263, dated October 11, which ordered the withdrawal of 1,000 military personnel by the end of the year, and the bulk of them out by 1965. Such an action would have been a policy reversal, but Kennedy was moving in a less hawkish direction since his speech about world peace at American University on June 10, 1963. At the time of Kennedys death, no final policy decision had been made as to Vietnam. In 2008, Theodore Sorensen wrote I would like to believe that Kennedy would have found a way to withdraw all American instructors and advisors Vietnam. But... I do not believe he knew in his last weeks what he was going to do. Sorensen added that, in his opinion, Vietnam was the only foreign policy problem handed off by JFK to his successor in no better, and possibly worse, shape than it was when he inherited it. U.S. involvement in the region escalated until his successor Lyndon Johnson directly deployed regular U.S. military forces for fighting the Vietnam War. After Kennedys assassination, President Johnson signed NSAM 273 on November 26, 1963. It reversed Kennedys decision to withdraw 1,000 troops, and reaffirmed the policy of assistance to the South Vietnamese. American University speech Kennedy delivers the commencement speech at American University, June 10, 1963 On June 10, 1963, Kennedy, at the high point of his rhetorical powers, delivered the commencement address at American University in Washington, D.C. Also known as Strategy of Peace, Kennedy not only outlined a plan to curb nuclear arms, but also laid out a hopeful, yet realistic route for world peace at a time when the U.S. and Soviet Union faced the potential for an escalating nuclear arms race. The President wished to discuss a topic on which too often ignorance abounds and the truth is too rarely perceived yet it is the most important topic on earth world peace... I speak of peace because of the new face of war...in an age when a singular nuclear weapon contains ten times the explosive force delivered by all the allied forces in the Second World War... an age when the deadly poisons produced by a nuclear exchange would be carried by wind and air and soil and seed to the far corners of the globe and to generations yet unborn... I speak of peace, therefore, as the necessary rational end of rational men... world peace, like community peace, does not require that each man love his neighbor it requires only that they live together in mutual tolerance... our problems are manmade therefore they can be solved by man. And man can be as big as he wants. The president also made two announcements that the Soviets had expressed a desire to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, and that the U.S had postponed planned atmospheric tests. West Berlin speech Kennedy delivering his speech in West Berlin In 1963, Germany was enduring a time of particular vulnerability due to Soviet aggression to the east, and the impending retirement of West German Chancellor Adenauer. At the same time, French President Charles de Gaulle was trying to build a FrancoWest German counterweight to the American and Soviet spheres of influence. To Kennedys eyes, this FrancoGerman cooperation seemed directed against NATOs influence in Europe. On June 26, President Kennedy gave a public speech in West Berlin reiterating the American commitment to Germany and criticizing communism. He was met with an ecstatic response from a massive audience. Kennedy used the construction of the Berlin Wall as an example of the failures of communism Freedom has many difficulties, and democracy is not perfect. But we have never had to put a wall up to keep our people in, to prevent them from leaving us. The speech is known for its famous phrase Ich bin ein Berliner . A million people were on the street for the speech. He remarked to Ted Sorensen afterwards Well never have another day like this one, as long as we live. Israel In 1960, Kennedy stated Israel will endure and flourish. It is the child of hope and the home of the brave. It can neither be broken by adversity nor demoralized by success. It carries the shield of democracy and it honors the sword of freedom.John F. Kennedy Speech by Senator John F. Kennedy, Zionists of America Convention, Statler Hilton Hotel, New York, NY, August 26, 1960 Subsequently, as president, Kennedy initiated the creation of security ties with Israel, and he is credited as the founder of the USIsraeli military alliance . Kennedy ended the arms embargo that the Eisenhower and Truman administrations had enforced on Israel. Describing the protection of Israel as a moral and national commitment, he was the first to introduce the concept of a special relationship between the US and Israel. Kennedy with Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir, December 27, 1962 Kennedy extended the first informal security guarantees to Israel in 1962 and, beginning in 1963, was the first US president to allow the sale to Israel of advanced US weaponry , as well as to provide diplomatic support for Israeli policies which were opposed by Arab neighbors such as its water project on the Jordan River.Walt, Stephen M. . The Origins of Alliances , Cornell University Press, pp. 95 96 As result of this newly created security alliance, Kennedy also encountered tensions with the Israeli government over the production of nuclear materials in Dimona which he believed could instigate a nuclear armsrace in the Middle East. After the existence of a nuclear plant was initially denied by the Israeli government, David BenGurion stated in a speech to the Israeli Knesset on December 21, 1960, that the purpose of the nuclear plant at Beersheba was for research in problems of arid zones and desert flora and fauna. When BenGurion met with Kennedy in New York, he claimed that Dimona was being developed to provide nuclear power for desalinization and other peaceful purposes for the time being. In a May 1963 letter to BenGurion, Kennedy wrote that he was skeptical and stated that American support to Israel could be in jeopardy if reliable information on the Israeli nuclear program was not forthcoming, BenGurion repeated previous reassurances that Dimona was being developed for peaceful purposes. The Israeli government resisted American pressure to open its nuclear facilities to International Atomic Energy Agency inspections. In 1962, the US and Israeli governments had agreed to an annual inspection regime. A science attach at the embassy in Tel Aviv concluded that parts of the Dimona facility had been shut down temporarily to mislead American scientists when they visited. According to Seymour Hersh, the Israelis set up false control rooms to show the Americans. Israeli lobbyist Abe Feinberg stated It was part of my job to tip them off that Kennedy was insisting on inspection. Hersh contends the inspections were conducted in such a way that it guaranteed that the whole procedure would be little more than a whitewash, as the president and his senior advisors had to understand the American inspection team would have to schedule its visits well in advance, and with the full acquiescence of Israel.Hersh, Samson Option , pp. 110 11 Marc Trachtenberg argued Although well aware of what the Israelis were doing, Kennedy chose to take this as satisfactory evidence of Israeli compliance with Americas nonproliferation policy. The American who led the inspection team stated that the essential goal of the inspections was to find ways to not reach the point of taking action against Israels nuclear weapons program.Hersh, Samson Option , p. 112 Rodger Davies, the director of the State Departments Office of Near Eastern Affairs, concluded in March 1965 that Israel was developing nuclear weapons. He reported that Israels target date for achieving nuclear capability was 1968 1969. On May 1, 1968, Undersecretary of State Nicholas Katzenbach told President Johnson that Dimona was producing enough plutonium to produce two bombs a year. The State Department argued that if Israel wanted arms, it should accept international supervision of its nuclear program. Dimona was never placed under IAEA safeguards. Attempts to write Israeli adherence to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty into contracts for the supply of U.S. weapons continued throughout 1968. Iraq Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, Shah of Iran, Kennedy, and U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in the White House Cabinet Room on April 13, 1962 Relations between the United States and Iraq became strained following the overthrow of the Iraqi monarchy on July 14, 1958, which resulted in the declaration of a republican government led by Brigadier Abd alKarim Qasim. On June 25, 1961, Qasim mobilized troops along the border between Iraq and Kuwait, declaring the latter nation an indivisible part of Iraq and causing a shortlived Kuwait Crisis. The United Kingdom which had just granted Kuwait independence on June 19, and whose economy was heavily dependent on Kuwaiti oil responded on July 1 by dispatching 5,000 troops to the country to deter an Iraqi invasion. At the same time, Kennedy dispatched a U.S. Navy task force to Bahrain, and the UK brought the dispute to United Nations Security Council, where the proposed resolution was vetoed by the Soviet Union. The situation was resolved in October, when the British troops were withdrawn and replaced by a 4,000strong Arab League force. In December 1961, Qasims government passed Public Law 80, which restricted the British and Americanowned Iraq Petroleum Company s concessionary holding to those areas in which oil was actually being produced, effectively expropriating 99.5 of the IPC concession. U.S. officials were alarmed by the expropriation as well as the recent Soviet veto of an Egyptiansponsored UN resolution requesting the admittance of Kuwait as UN member state, which they believed to be connected. Senior National Security Council adviser Robert Komer worried that if the IPC ceased production in response, Qasim might grab Kuwait , or throw himself into Russian arms. Komer also made note of widespread rumors that a nationalist coup against Qasim could be imminent, and had the potential to get Iraq back on a more neutral keel. In April 1962, the State Department issued new guidelines on Iraq that were intended to increase American influence there. Meanwhile, Kennedy instructed the CIA under the direction of Archibald Bulloch Roosevelt Jr. to begin making preparations for a military coup against Qasim. The antiimperialist and anticommunist Iraqi Baath Party overthrew and executed Qasim in a violent coup on February 8, 1963. While there have been persistent rumors that the CIA orchestrated the coup, declassified documents and the testimony of former CIA officers indicate that there was no direct American involvement, although the CIA was actively seeking a suitable replacement for Qasim within the Iraqi military and had been informed of an earlier Baathist coup plot. The Kennedy administration was pleased with the outcome and ultimately approved a 55million arms deal for Iraq. Ireland John F. Kennedy visiting the John Barry Memorial at Crescent Quay in Wexford, Ireland President Kennedy in motorcade in Patrick Street, Cork, in Ireland on June 28, 1963 During his fourday visit to his ancestral home of Ireland in June 1963, Kennedy accepted a grant of armorial bearings from the Chief Herald of Ireland and received honorary degrees from the National University of Ireland and Trinity College, Dublin. He visited the cottage at Dunganstown, near New Ross, County Wexford where his ancestors had lived before emigrating to America. He also became the first foreign leader to address the Houses of the Oireachtas . JFK is First Foreign Leader to Address Dil ireann RT Archives, June 28, 1963. Address Before the Irish Parliament in Dublin, June 28, 1963 Kennedy Library and Museum, 19630628. President Kennedy in Ireland RT Archives. Retrieved 20130703. JFK Homecoming Memory Project On December 22, 2006, the Irish Department of Justice released declassified police documents indicating that security was heightened as Kennedy was the subject of three death threats during this visit. Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Troubled by the longterm dangers of radioactive contamination and nuclear weapons proliferation, Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, originally conceived in Adlai Stevensons 1956 presidential campaign. In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons that September. The United States responded by conducting tests five days later. Shortly thereafter, new U.S. satellites began delivering images which made it clear that the Soviets were substantially behind the U.S. in the arms race. Nevertheless, the greater nuclear strength of the U.S. was of little value as long as the U.S.S.R. perceived itself to be at parity. In July 1963, Kennedy sent W. Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets. The introductory sessions included Khrushchev, who later delegated Soviet representation to Andrei Gromyko. It quickly became clear that a comprehensive test ban would not be implemented, due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets to allow inspections that would verify compliance. Ultimately, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to a limited treaty, which prohibited atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, or underwater, but not underground. The U.S. Senate ratified this and Kennedy signed it into law in October 1963. France was quick to declare that it was free to continue developing and testing its nuclear defenses. Domestic policy President Kennedy in Fort Worth, Texas, on Friday morning, November 22, 1963 Kennedy called his domestic program the New Frontier. It ambitiously promised federal funding for education, medical care for the elderly, economic aid to rural regions, and government intervention to halt the recession. Kennedy also promised an end to racial discrimination, though his agenda, which included the endorsement of the Voter Education Project in 1962, produced little progress in areas such as Mississippi where the VEP concluded that discrimination was so entrenched. In his 1963 State of the Union address, he proposed substantial tax reform, and a reduction in income tax rates from the current range of 20 90 to a range of 14 65 he proposed a reduction in the corporate tax rates from 52 to 47. Kennedy added that the top rate should be set at 70 if certain deductions were not eliminated for high income earners. Congress did not act until 1964, after his death, when the top individual rate was lowered to 70, and the top corporate rate was set at 48 . To the Economic Club of New York, he spoke in 1963 of ...the paradoxical truth that tax rates are too high and revenues too low and the soundest way to raise revenue in the long term is to lower rates now. Congress passed few of Kennedys major programs during his lifetime, but did vote them through in 1964 and 1965 under his successor Johnson. Economy Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies, loosening monetary policy to keep interest rates down and to encourage growth of the economy. He presided over the first government budget to top the 100billion mark, in 1962, and his first budget in 1961 led to the countrys first nonwar, nonrecession deficit. The economy, which had been through two recessions in three years, and was in one when Kennedy took office, accelerated notably during his presidency. Despite low inflation and interest rates, GDP had grown by an average of only 2.2 per annum during the Eisenhower presidency , and had declined by 1 during Eisenhowers last twelve months in office. The economy turned around and prospered during the Kennedy administration. GDP expanded by an average of 5.5 from early 1961 to late 1963, while inflation remained steady at around 1 and unemployment eased. Industrial production rose by 15 and motor vehicle sales rose by 40. This rate of growth in GDP and industry continued until around 1969, and has yet to be repeated for such a sustained period of time. Robert Kennedy took the position that the steel executives had illegally colluded to fix prices. He stated Were going for broke..... their expense accounts, where theyve been and what theyve been doing..... the FBI is to interview them all..... we cant lose this. The administrations actions influenced U.S. Steel to rescind the price increase. The Wall Street Journal wrote that the administration had acted by naked power, by threats, by agents of the state security police. Yale law professor Charles Reich opined in The New Republic that the administration had violated civil liberties by calling a grand jury to indict U.S. Steel for collusion so quickly. A New York Times editorial praised Kennedys actions and said that the steel industrys price increase imperils the economic welfare of the country by inviting a tidal wave of inflation. Nevertheless, the administrations Bureau of Budget reported the price increase would have resulted in a net gain for GDP as well as a net budget surplus. The stock market, which had steadily declined since Kennedys election, dropped 10 shortly after the administrations action on the steel industry. Federal and military death penalty As president, Kennedy oversaw the last federal execution prior to Furman v. Georgia , a 1972 case that led to a moratorium on federal executions. Victor Feguer was sentenced to death by a federal court in Iowa and was executed on March 15, 1963. Kennedy commuted a death sentence imposed by a military court on seaman Jimmie Henderson on February 12, 1962, changing the penalty to life in prison. On March 22, 1962, Kennedy signed into law HR5143 , abolishing the mandatory death penalty for first degree murder in the District of Columbia, the only remaining jurisdiction in the United States with such a penalty. The death penalty has not been applied in the District of Columbia since 1957, and has now been abolished. Civil Rights Movement Thurgood Marshall, appointed to the federal bench by Kennedy in May 1961 The turbulent end of statesanctioned racial discrimination was one of the most pressing domestic issues of the 1960s. Jim Crow segregation was the established law in the Deep South.Grantham , The Life and Death of the Solid South A Political History , p. 156 The Supreme Court of the United States had ruled in 1954 in Brown v. Board of Education that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional. Many schools, especially in southern states, did not obey the Supreme Courts decision. The Court also prohibited segregation at other public facilities but it continued nonetheless. Kennedy verbally supported racial integration and civil rights during the 1960 campaign he telephoned Coretta Scott King, wife of the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., who had been jailed while trying to integrate a department store lunch counter. Robert Kennedy called Georgia governor Ernest Vandiver and obtained Kings release from prison, which drew additional black support to his brothers candidacy. Upon taking office in 1961, Kennedy postponed promised civil rights legislation he made while campaigning in 1960, recognizing that conservative Southern Democrats controlled congressional legislation. Historian Carl M. Brauer concluded that passing any civil rights legislation in 1961 would have been futile. During his first year in office Kennedy appointed many blacks to office including his May appointment of civil rights attorney Thurgood Marshall to the federal bench. In his first State of the Union Address in January 1961, President Kennedy said The denial of constitutional rights to some of our fellow Americans on account of race at the ballot box and elsewhere disturbs the national conscience, and subjects us to the charge of world opinion that our democracy is not equal to the high promise of our heritage.John F. Kennedy, Urs Swharz, Paul Hamlyn, 1964 Kennedy believed the grassroots movement for civil rights would anger many Southern whites and make it more difficult to pass civil rights laws in Congress, including antipoverty legislation, and he distanced himself from it. Kennedy was concerned with other issues early in his presidency, such as the Cold War, Bay of Pigs fiasco and the situation in Southeast Asia. As articulated by brother Robert, the administrations early priority was to keep the president out of this civil rights mess. Civil rights movement participants, mainly those on the front line in the South, viewed Kennedy as lukewarm, especially concerning the Freedom Riders, who organized an integrated public transportation effort in the south, and who were repeatedly met with white mob violence, including by law enforcement officers, both federal and state. Kennedy assigned federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders rather than using federal troops or uncooperative FBI agents. Robert Kennedy, speaking for the president, urged the Freedom Riders to get off the buses and leave the matter to peaceful settlement in the courts. Kennedy feared sending federal troops would stir up hated memories of Reconstruction after the Civil War among conservative Southern whites. On March 6, 1961, Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925 which required government contractors to take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race, creed, color, or national origin.wikisource Executive Order No. 10925 It established the Presidents Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity. Displeased with Kennedys pace addressing the issue of segregation, Martin Luther King, Jr. and his associates produced a document in 1962 calling on the president to follow in the footsteps of Abraham Lincoln and use an Executive Order to deliver a blow for Civil Rights as a kind of Second Emancipation Proclamation. Kennedy did not execute the order. In September 1962, James Meredith enrolled at the University of Mississippi but was prevented from entering. Attorney General Robert Kennedy responded by sending 400 federal marshals, while President Kennedy reluctantly sent 3,000 troops after the situation on campus turned violent. The Ole Miss riot of 1962 left two dead and dozens injured, but Meredith did finally enroll for class. Kennedy regretted not sending in troops earlier and he began to doubt whether the evils of Reconstruction of the 1860s and 1870s he had been taught or believed in were true. The instigating subculture at the Old Miss riot, and at many other racially ignited events, was the Ku Klux Klan.Gitlin , The Ku Klux Klan A Guide to an American Subculture , p. 29 On November 20, 1962, Kennedy signed Executive Order 11063, prohibiting racial discrimination in federally supported housing or related facilities. Both the President and the Attorney General were concerned about Kings ties to suspected Communists Jack ODell and Stanley Levison. After the President and his civil rights expert Harris Wofford pressed King to ask both men to resign from the SCLC, King agreed to ask only ODell to resign from the organization and allowed Levison, whom he regarded as a trusted advisor, to remain. In early 1963, Kennedy related to Martin Luther King, Jr., his thoughts on the prospects for civil rights legislation If we get into a long fight over this in Congress, it will bottleneck everything else, and we will still get no bill. Civil rights clashes were on the rise that year.In the first week of June there were 160 incidents of violence. . Brother Robert and Ted Sorenson pressed Kennedy to take more initiative on the legislative front. Kennedys Report to the American People on Civil Rights, June 11, 1963 On June 11, 1963, President Kennedy intervened when Alabama Governor George Wallace blocked the doorway to the University of Alabama to stop two African American students, Vivian Malone and James Hood, from attending. Wallace moved aside only after being confronted by Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama National Guard, which had just been federalized by order of the president. That evening Kennedy gave his famous Report to the American People on Civil Rights on national television and radio, launching his initiative for civil rights legislation to provide equal access to public schools and other facilities, and greater protection of voting rights. His proposals became part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The day ended with the murder of a NAACP leader, Medgar Evers, in front of his home in Mississippi. As the president had predicted, the day after his TV speech, and in reaction to it, House Majority leader Carl Albert called to advise him that his twoyear signature effort in Congress to combat poverty in Appalachia had been defeated, primarily by the votes of Southern Democrats and Republicans. When Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. complemented Kennedy on his remarks, the latter bitterly replied, Yes, and look at what happened to area development the very next day in the House. He then added, But of course, I had to give that speech, and Im glad that I did. On June 16 The New York Times published an editorial which argued that while the president had initially moved too slowly and with little evidence of deep moral commitment in regards to civil rights he now demonstrated a genuine sense of urgency about eradicating racial discrimination from our national life. Earlier, Kennedy had signed the executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women on December 14, 1961. Former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt led the commission. The Commission statistics revealed that women were also experiencing discrimination its final report, documenting legal and cultural barriers, was issued in October 1963. Further, on June 10, 1963, Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act of 1963, a federal law amending the Fair Labor Standards Act, aimed at abolishing wage disparity based on sex. Kennedy meets with leaders of the March on Washington in the Oval Office, August 28, 1963 Over a hundred thousand, predominantly African Americans, gathered in Washington for the civil rights March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963. Kennedy feared the March would have a negative effect on the prospects for the civil rights bills in Congress, and declined an invitation to speak. He turned over some of the details of the governments involvement to the Dept. of Justice, which channelled hundreds of thousands of dollars to the six sponsors of the March, including the N.A.A.C.P. and Martin Luther Kings Southern Christian Leadership Conference . To ensure a peaceful demonstration, the organizers and the president personally edited speeches which were inflammatory and agreed the March would be held on a Wednesday and would be over at 400pm. Thousands of troops were placed on standby. Kennedy watched Kings speech on TV and was very impressed. The March was considered a triumph of managed protest, and not one arrest relating to the demonstration occurred. Afterwards, the March leaders accepted an invitation to the White House to meet with Kennedy and photos were taken. Kennedy felt that the March was a victory for him as well and bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill. Nevertheless, the struggle was far from over. Three weeks later, a bomb exploded on Sunday, September 15, at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham by the end of the day, four African American children had died in the explosion, and two other children were shot to death in the aftermath. Due to this resurgent violence, the civil rights legislation underwent some drastic amendments that critically endangered any prospects for passage of the bill, to the outrage of the president. Kennedy called the congressional leaders to the White House and by the following day the original bill, without the additions, had enough votes to get it out of the House committee. Gaining Republican support, Senator Everett Dirksen promised the legislation would be brought to a vote preventing a Senate filibuster. The legislation was enacted by Kennedys successor President Lyndon B. Johnson, prompted by Kennedys memory, after his assassination in November, enforcing voting rights, public accommodations, employment, education, and the administration of justice. Civil liberties In February 1962, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who was suspicious of civilrights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. and viewed him as an upstart troublemaker, presented the Kennedy Administration with allegations that some of Kings close confidants and advisers were communists. Concerned by these allegations, the FBI deployed agents to monitor King in the following months. Robert Kennedy and the president also both warned King to discontinue the suspect associations. After the associations continued, Robert Kennedy issued a written directive authorizing the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, Kings civil rights organization, in October 1963. Although Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of Kings phones on a trial basis, for a month or so, Hoover extended the clearance so his men were unshackled to look for evidence in any areas of Kings life they deemed worthy. The wiretapping continued through June 1966 and was revealed in 1968. Immigration During the 1960 campaign Kennedy proposed an overhaul of American immigration and naturalization laws to ban discrimination based on national origin. He saw this proposal as an extension of his planned civil rights agenda as president. These reforms later became law through the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, which dramatically shifted the source of immigration from Northern and Western European countries towards immigration from Latin America and Asia. The policy change also shifted the emphasis in the selection of immigrants in favor of family reunification. The latepresidents brother, Senator Edward Kennedy helped steer the legislation through the Senate. Native American relations Construction of the Kinzua Dam flooded of Seneca nation land that they had occupied under the Treaty of 1794, and forced 600 Seneca to relocate to Salamanca, New York. Kennedy was asked by the American Civil Liberties Union to intervene and to halt the project, but he declined, citing a critical need for flood control. He expressed concern about the plight of the Seneca, and directed government agencies to assist in obtaining more land, damages, and assistance to help mitigate their displacement. Space policy The Apollo program was conceived early in 1960, during the Eisenhower administration, as a followup to Project Mercury, to be used as a shuttle to an Earthorbital space station, flights around the Moon, or landing on it. While NASA went ahead with planning for Apollo, funding for the program was far from certain, given Eisenhowers ambivalent attitude to manned spaceflight.Murray and Cox, Apollo , p. 60. As senator, Kennedy had been opposed to the space program and wanted to terminate it. In constructing his Presidential administration, Kennedy elected to retain Eisenhowers last science advisor Jerome Wiesner as head of the Presidents Science Advisory Committee. Wiesner was strongly opposed to manned space exploration, having issued a report highly critical of Project Mercury.Levine, Future of the US Space Program , p. 71.Levine, Anold S. . Managing NASA in the Apollo Era , chapter 27, The Lunar Landing Decision and Its Aftermath. NASA SP4102. Kennedy was turned down by seventeen candidates for NASA administrator before the post was accepted by James E. Webb, an experienced Washington insider who served President Harry S. Truman as budget director and undersecretary of state. Webb proved to be adept at obtaining the support of Congress, the President, and the American people. Kennedy also persuaded Congress to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act to allow him to delegate his chairmanship of the National Aeronautics and Space Council to the Vice President, both because of the knowledge of the space program Johnson gained in the Senate working for the creation of NASA, and to help keep the politically savvy Johnson occupied. In Kennedys January 1961 State of the Union address, he had suggested international cooperation in space. Khrushchev declined, as the Soviets did not wish to reveal the status of their rocketry and space capabilities. Early in his presidency, Kennedy was poised to dismantle the manned space program, but postponed any decision out of deference to Johnson, who had been a strong supporter of the space program in the Senate. Kennedys advisors speculated that a Moon flight would be prohibitively expensive, and he was considering plans to dismantle the Apollo program due to its cost.Sidey, Hugh , John F. Kennedy , pp. 117 118. Kennedy proposing a program to land men on the Moon to Congress in May 1961. Johnson and Sam Rayburn are seated behind him. However, this quickly changed on April 12, 1961, when Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space, reinforcing American fears about being left behind in a technological competition with the Soviet Union. Kennedy now became eager for the U.S. to take the lead in the Space Race, for reasons of strategy and prestige. On April 20, he sent a memo to Johnson, asking him to look into the status of Americas space program, and into programs that could offer NASA the opportunity to catch up. Key Apollo Source Documents. After consulting with Wernher von Braun, Johnson responded approximately one week later, concluding that we are neither making maximum effort nor achieving results necessary if this country is to reach a position of leadership. Key Apollo Source Documents. His memo concluded that a manned Moon landing was far enough in the future that it was likely the United States would achieve it first. Kennedys advisor Ted Sorensen advised him to support the Moon landing, and on May 25, Kennedy announced the goal in a speech titled Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs ... I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the longrange exploration of space and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish. Kennedy speaks at Rice University, September 12, 1962 After Congress authorized the funding, Webb began reorganizing NASA, increasing its staffing level, and building two new centers a Launch Operations Center for the large Moon rocket northwest of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, and a Manned Spacecraft Center on land donated through Rice University in Houston, Texas. Kennedy took the latter occasion as an opportunity to deliver another speech at Rice to promote the space effort on September 12, 1962, in which he said No nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space. ...We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard. On November 21, 1962, in a cabinet meeting with NASA administrator Webb and other officials, Kennedy explained that the Moon shot was important for reasons of international prestige, and that the expense was justified. Johnson assured him that lessons learned from the space program had military value as well. Costs for the Apollo program were expected to reach 40 billion. In a September 1963 speech before the United Nations, Kennedy urged cooperation between the Soviets and Americans in space, specifically recommending that Apollo be switched to a joint expedition to the Moon.Wikisource John F. Kennedys Address Before the 18th General Assembly of the United Nations Khrushchev again declined, and the Soviets did not commit to a manned Moon mission until 1964. On July 20, 1969, almost six years after Kennedys death, Apollo 11 landed the first manned spacecraft on the Moon. Administration, Cabinet, and judicial appointments The official White House portrait of John F. Kennedy, painted by Aaron Shikler Judicial appointments Supreme Court Kennedy appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States Byron White 1962 Arthur Goldberg 1962 Other courts In addition to his two Supreme Court appointments, Kennedy appointed 21 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 102 judges to the United States district courts. Assassination The Kennedys and the Connallys in the presidential limousine moments before the assassination in Dallas President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, at 1230pm Central Standard Time on Friday, November 22, 1963, while on a political trip to Texas to smooth over frictions in the Democratic Party between liberals Ralph Yarborough and Don Yarborough and conservative John Connally. Traveling in a presidential motorcade through downtown Dallas, he was shot once in the back, the bullet exiting via his throat,Parkland Hospital doctors attending to him reported and once in the head. Kennedy was taken to Parkland Hospital for emergency medical treatment, where he was pronounced dead 30 minutes later he was 46 years old and had been in office for 1,036 days. Lee Harvey Oswald, an order filler at the Texas School Book Depository from which the shots were suspected to have been fired, was arrested for the murder of police officer J.D. Tippit, and was subsequently charged with Kennedys assassination. He denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy,Lee Oswald claiming innocence , Youtube.comWarren Commission Hearings, vol. 20, p. 366, Kantor Exhibit No. 3 Handwritten notes made by Seth Kantor concerning events surrounding the assassination and was killed by Jack Ruby on November 24, before he could be prosecuted. Ruby was arrested and convicted for the murder of Oswald. Ruby successfully appealed his conviction and death sentence but became ill and died of cancer on January 3, 1967, while the date for his new trial was being set. By executive order, President Johnson created the Warren Commission chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren to investigate the assassination, which concluded that Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy, and that Oswald was not part of any conspiracy. The results of this investigation are disputed by many.Gus Russo and Stephen Molton Did Castro OK the Kennedy Assassination, American Heritage , Winter 2009. The assassination proved to be a pivotal moment in U.S. history because of its impact on the nation, and the ensuing political repercussions. A 2004 Fox News poll found that 66 of Americans thought there had been a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy, while 74 thought that there had been a coverup. A Gallup Poll in midNovember 2013, showed 61 believed in a conspiracy, and only 30 thought that Oswald did it alone. In 1979, the U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that it believed that Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy. The committee was unable to identify the other gunmen or the extent of the conspiracy.Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations of the U.S. House of Representatives. U.S. House of Representatives. Retrieved 11 November 2013. In 2002, historian Carl M. Brauer concluded that the publics fascination with the assassination may indicate a psychological denial of Kennedys death, a mass wish...to undo it. Funeral President Kennedys family leaving his funeral at the U.S. Capitol Building A Requiem Mass was held for Kennedy at the Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle on November 25, 1963. Afterwards, Kennedy was interred in a small plot, , in Arlington National Cemetery. Over a period of three years , an estimated 16million people visited his grave. On March 14, 1967, Kennedys remains were moved to a permanent burial plot and memorial at the cemetery. The funeral was officiated by Father John J. Cavanaugh. It was from this memorial that the graves of both Robert and Ted Kennedy were modeled. The honor guard at Kennedys graveside was the 37th Cadet Class of the Irish Army. Kennedy was greatly impressed by the Irish Cadets on his last official visit to Ireland, so much so that Jackie Kennedy requested the Irish Army to be the honor guard at her husbands funeral. Kennedys wife Jacqueline, and their two deceased minor children, were later buried with him. His brother, Robert was buried nearby in June 1968. In August 2009, his brother, Ted was also buried near his two brothers. John F. Kennedys grave is lit with an Eternal Flame. Kennedy and William Howard Taft are the only two U.S. presidents buried at Arlington.This Day in History 1967 JFKs body moved to permanent gravesite, History.com. Retrieved April 8, 2008. According to the JFK Library, I Have a Rendezvous with Death, by Alan Seeger was one of John F. Kennedys favorite poems and he often asked his wife to recite it. Personal life, family, and reputation The Kennedy family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, in 1963 The Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States, having produced a president, three senators, an ambassador, and multiple other representatives, both on the federal and state level. While a Congressman, Kennedy embarked on a sevenweek trip to India, Japan, Vietnam, and Israel in 1951, at which point he became close with his then 25yearold brother Bobby, as well as his 27yearold sister Pat. Because they were several years apart in age, the brothers had previously seen little of each other. This trip was the first extended time they had spent together and resulted in their becoming best friends. Robert would play a major role in his brothers career, and he served as his brothers Attorney General and presidential advisor. Robert would later run for president in 1968 before his assassination, while another Kennedy brother, Ted, ran for president in 1980. Kennedy came in third in Gallups List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century. Kennedy was a life member of the National Rifle Association. Wife and children The First Family in 1962 Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Lee Jackie Bouvier , when he was a congressman. Charles L. Bartlett, a journalist, introduced the pair at a dinner party.Cover story, Time magazine , January 20, 1961 They were married a year after he was elected senator, on September 12, 1953.Specious allegations in 1997 by UK journalist Terry OHanlon and by author Seymour Hersh that Kennedy had married previously have been soundly disproven. Reeves states that Ben Bradlee, then at Newsweek , inspected FBI files on it, and confirmed the falsehood. for further refutation, see . Caroline Bouvier Kennedy was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFKs immediate family. John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr., nicknamed JohnJohn by the press as a child, was born in late November 1960, 17 days after his father was elected. John Jr., a graduate of Brown University, died in 1999 when the small plane he was piloting crashed en route to Marthas Vineyard. Popular image The Kennedy brothers Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, Senator Ted Kennedy, and President John F. Kennedy in 1963 Kennedy and his wife were younger in comparison to the presidents and first ladies who preceded them, and both were popular in the media culture in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians, influencing fashion trends and becoming the subjects of numerous photo spreads in popular magazines. Although Eisenhower had allowed presidential press conferences to be filmed for television, Kennedy was the first president to ask for them to be broadcast live and made good use of the medium. In 1961 the RadioTelevision News Directors Association presented Kennedy with its highest honor, the Paul White Award, in recognition of his open relationship with the media. Mrs. Kennedy brought new art and furniture to the White House, and directed its restoration. They invited a range of artists, writers and intellectuals to rounds of White House dinners, raising the profile of the arts in America. On the White House lawn, the Kennedys established a swimming pool and tree house, while Caroline attended a preschool along with 10 other children inside the home. The president was closely tied to popular culture, emphasized by songs such as Twisting at the White House. Vaughn Meaders First Family comedy album, which parodied the president, the first lady, their family, and the administration, sold about four million copies. On May 19, 1962, Marilyn Monroe sang Happy Birthday, Mr. President at a large party in Madison Square Garden, celebrating Kennedys upcoming fortyfifth birthday. Camelot Era The term Camelot came to be used retrospectively as iconic of the Kennedy administration, and the charisma of Kennedy and his family. The term was first publicly used by his wife in a postassassination Life magazine interview with Theodore H. White, in which she revealed his affection for the contemporary Broadway musical of the same name, particularly the closing lines of the title songThe Personal Papers of Theodore H. White Series 11. Camelot Documents, John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum quotation Health In 2002 Robert Dallek wrote an extensive history of Kennedys health. Dallek was able to consult a collection of Kennedyassociated papers from the years 1955 1963, including Xrays and prescription records from the files of White House physician Dr. Janet Travell. According to Travells records, during his presidential years Kennedy suffered from high fevers stomach, colon, and prostate issues abscesses high cholesterol and adrenal problems. Travell kept a Medicine Administration Record, cataloguing Kennedys medications injected and ingested corticosteroids for his adrenal insufficiency procaine shots and ultrasound treatments and hot packs for his back Lomotil, Metamucil, paregoric, phenobarbital, testosterone, and trasentine to control his diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, and weight loss penicillin and other antibiotics for his urinarytract infections and an abscess and Tuinal to help him sleep. Years after Kennedys death, it was revealed that in September 1947, while Kennedy was 30 and in his first term in Congress, he was diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with Addisons disease, a rare endocrine disorder. In 1966 Dr. Travell revealed that Kennedy also had hypothyroidism. The presence of two endocrine diseases raises the possibility that Kennedy had autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2 . Kennedy also suffered from chronic and severe back pain, for which he had surgery and was written up in the American Medical Associations Archives of Surgery . Kennedys condition may have had diplomatic repercussions, as he appears to have been taking a combination of drugs to treat severe back pain during the 1961 Vienna Summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. The combination included hormones, animal organ cells, steroids, vitamins, enzymes, and amphetamines, and possible potential side effects included hyperactivity, hypertension, impaired judgment, nervousness, and mood swings. Kennedy at one time was regularly seen by no fewer than three doctors, one of whom, Max Jacobson, was unknown to the other two, as his mode of treatment was controversialNew York Sun September 20, 2005 Dr. Feelgood Retrieved July 11, 2011 and used for the most severe bouts of back pain. There were disagreements among his doctors, into late 1961, over the proper balance of medication and exercise, with the president preferring the former as he was short on time and desired immediate relief. During that time frame, the presidents physician, George Burkley, did set up some gym equipment in the White House basement where Kennedy did stretching exercises for his back three times a week. Details of these and other medical problems were not publicly disclosed during Kennedys lifetime.Online NewsHour with Senior Correspondent Ray Suarez and physician Jeffrey Kelman, Pres. Kennedys Health Secrets, The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer transcript, November 18, 2002 The Presidents primary White House physician, George Burkley, realized that treatments by Jacobson and Travell, including the excessive use of steroids and amphetamines, were medically inappropriate, and took effective action to remove the president from their care. It was later observed that President Kennedys leadership improved greatly once the treatments of Jacobson had been discontinued and been replaced by a medically appropriate regimen under Burkley. Dr. Ghaemi, who studied Kennedys medical records, concluded there was a correlation it is not causation but it may not be coincidence either. Personal tragedies The newlyweds surrounded by Jacks siblings on their wedding day in Newport, Rhode Island in 1953 Kennedy experienced a number of family tragedies. His older brother Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. was killed in action in 1944 at age 29 over the English Channel during a first attack execution of Operation Aphrodite during World War II. Kennedys younger sister Rose Marie Rosemary Kennedy was born in 1918 with intellectual disabilities and underwent a prefrontal lobotomy at age 23, leaving her permanently incapacitated. His younger sister Kathleen Agnes Kick Kennedy died in France as the result of a plane crash in 1948. His wife Jacqueline Kennedy suffered a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956 a daughter informally named Arabella. A son, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, died two days after birth in August 1963. Affairs and extramarital relationships Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, President Kennedy in 1962 As a young single man in the 1940s, Kennedy had affairs with Danish journalist Inga Arvad, and actress Gene Tierney. Later in life, Kennedy reportedly had extramarital affairs with a number of women, including Marilyn Monroe, Gunilla von Post,Bone, James , How JFKs Riviera romance led to years of longing, The Times , London. Retrieved April 2, 2010. Judith Campbell, Mary Pinchot Meyer, Marlene Dietrich, Mimi Alford, and his wifes press secretary, Pamela Turnure. The extent of a relationship with Monroe is not fully known, although it has been reported that they spent a weekend together in March 1962 while Kennedy was staying at Bing Crosbys house. Furthermore, the White House switchboard noted calls from her during 1962. J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, received reports about Kennedys indiscretions. Kennedy inspired affection and loyalty from the members of his team and his supporters. According to Reeves, this included the logistics of Kennedys liaisons.....which required secrecy and devotion rare in the annals of the energetic service demanded by successful politicians. Kennedy believed that his friendly relationship with members of the press would help protect him from revelations about his sex life. Historical evaluations and legacy The US Special Forces had a special bond with Kennedy. It was President Kennedy who was responsible for the rebuilding of the Special Forces and giving us back our Green Beret, said Forrest Lindley, a writer for the US military newspaper Stars and Stripes who served with Special Forces in Vietnam. This bond was shown at Kennedys funeral. At the commemoration of the 25th anniversary of Kennedys death, General Michael D. Healy, the last commander of Special Forces in Vietnam, spoke at Arlington Cemetery. Later, a wreath in the form of the Green Beret would be placed on the grave, continuing a tradition that began the day of his funeral when a sergeant in charge of a detail of Special Forces men guarding the grave placed his beret on the coffin. Kennedy was the first of six presidents to have served in the U.S. Navy, and one of the enduring legacies of his administration was the creation in 1961 of another special forces command, the Navy SEALs, which Kennedy enthusiastically supported. Kennedys civil rights proposals led to the Civil Rights Act of 1964. President Lyndon B. Johnson, Kennedys successor, took up the mantle and pushed the landmark Civil Rights Act through a bitterly divided Congress by invoking the slain presidents memory. President Johnson then signed the Act into law on July 2, 1964. This civil rights law ended what was known as the Solid South and certain provisions were modeled after the Civil Rights Act of 1875, signed into law by President Ulysses S. Grant. The dedication of a new forever stamp to honor what would be President John F. Kennedys 100th birthday Kennedys continuation of Presidents Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhowers policies of giving economic and military aid to South Vietnam left the door open for President Johnsons escalation of the conflict. At the time of Kennedys death, no final policy decision had been made as to Vietnam, leading historians, cabinet members, and writers to continue to disagree on whether the Vietnam conflict would have escalated to the point it did had he survived. His agreement to the NSAM 263 action of withdrawing 1,000 troops by the end of 1963, and his earlier 1963 speech at American University, suggest that he was ready to end the Vietnam War. The Vietnam War contributed greatly to a decade of national difficulties, amid violent disappointment on the political landscape. Many of Kennedys speeches are considered iconic and despite his relatively short term in office, and the lack of major legislative changes coming to fruition during his term, Americans regularly vote him as one of the best presidents, in the same league as Abraham Lincoln, George Washington, and Franklin D. Roosevelt. Some excerpts of Kennedys inaugural address are engraved on a plaque at his grave at Arlington. He was posthumously awarded the Pacem in Terris Award . It was named after a 1963 encyclical letter by Pope John XXIII that calls upon all people of goodwill to secure peace among all nations. Kennedy is the only president to have predeceased both his mother and father. He is also the only president to have predeceased a grandparent. His maternal grandmother, Mary Josephine Josie Hannon, died in August 1964, nine months after his assassination. Throughout the Englishspeaking world, the given name Kennedy has sometimes been used in honor of President Kennedy, as well his brother Robert. Effect of assassination Television became the primary source by which people were kept informed of events surrounding John F. Kennedys assassination. In fact, television started to come of age before the assassination. On September 2, 1963, Kennedy helped inaugurate network televisions first halfhour nightly evening newscast according to an interview with CBS Evening News anchor Walter Cronkite. Kennedy on a U.S. postage stamp, issue of 1967 Newspapers were kept as souvenirs rather than sources of updated information. In this sense his assassination was the first major TV news event of its kind. TV coverage united the nation, interpreting what went on, and creating memories of this space in time. All three major U.S. television networks suspended their regular schedules and switched to allnews coverage from November 22 through November 26, 1963, being on the air for 70 hours, making it the longest uninterrupted news event on American TV until 911. The assassination had an effect on many people, not only in the U.S. but around the world. Many vividly remember where they were when first learning of the news that Kennedy was assassinated, as with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, before it and the September 11 attacks after it. UN Ambassador Adlai Stevenson said of the assassination all of us..... will bear the grief of his death until the day of ours. Many people have also spoken of the shocking news, compounded by the pall of uncertainty about the identity of the assassin, the possible instigators, and the causes of the killing, as an end to innocence, and in retrospect it has been coalesced with other changes of the tumultuous decade of the 1960s, especially the Vietnam War. Ultimately, the death of President Kennedy, and the ensuing confusion surrounding the facts of his assassination, are of political and historical importance insofar as they marked a turning point and decline in the faith of the American people in the political establishment a point made by commentators from Gore Vidal to Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. and implied by Oliver Stone in several of his films, such as his landmark 1991 JFK . Memorials and eponyms John F. Kennedy Eternal Flame memorial John F. Kennedy International Airport, American airport in New York City nations busiest international gateway John F. Kennedy School of Government, part of Harvard University John F. Kennedy Space Center, U.S. government installation that manages and operates Americas astronaut launch facilities in Merritt Island, Florida , U.S. Navy aircraft carrier ordered in April 1964, launched May 1967, decommissioned August 2007 nicknamed Big John , U.S. Navy aircraft carrier that began construction in 2011, and is scheduled to be placed in commission in 2020 Kennedy half dollar, a fiftycent coin first minted in 1964 Media Newsreel footage of the inauguration ceremony and speeches See also Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Cultural depictions of John F. Kennedy Timeline of the presidency of John F. Kennedy Jesuit Ivy Kennedy curse Kennedy Doctrine Kennedy half dollar Lincoln Kennedy coincidences urban legend Operation Northwoods Orville Nix, photographer of another film of the assassination Senator, youre no Jack Kennedy retort by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, 1988 VP debate The John F. Kennedy Memorial Park The Torch of Friendship Abraham Zapruder, photographer of the primary film of assassination, the Zapruder film. John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories General History of the United States List of assassinated American politicians List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience List of Presidents of the United States who died in office List of United States presidential assassination attempts and plots Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps Notes References Citations Publications Further reading Casey, Shaun. The Making of a Catholic President Kennedy vs. Nixon 1960 Collier, Peter Horowitz, David. The Kennedys Cottrell, John. Assassination The World Stood Still Fay, Paul B., Jr. The Pleasure of His Company Freedman, Lawrence. Kennedys Wars Berlin, Cuba, Laos and Vietnam Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali. One Hell of a Gamble Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958 1964 Giglio, James. The Presidency of John F. Kennedy Hamilton, Nigel. JFK Reckless Youth Harper, Paul, and Krieg, Joann P. eds. John F. Kennedy The Promise Revisited Harris, Seymour E. The Economics of the Political Parties, with Special Attention to Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy Heath, Jim F. Decade of Disillusionment The Kennedy Johnson Years Hersh, Seymour. The Dark Side of Camelot Kunz, Diane B. The Diplomacy of the Crucial Decade American Foreign Relations during the 1960s Lynch, Grayston L. Decision for Disaster Betrayal at the Bay of Pigs Manchester, William. Portrait of a President John F. Kennedy in Profile Newman, John M. JFK and Vietnam Deception, Intrigue, and the Struggle for Power Parmet, Herbert. Jack The Struggles of John F. Kennedy Parmet, Herbert. JFK The Presidency of John F. Kennedy Parmet, Herbert. The Kennedy Myth. In Myth America A Historical Anthology, Volume II . Gerster, Patrick, and Cords, Nicholas. Piper, Michael Collins. Final Judgment . American Free Press Reeves, Thomas. A Question of Character A Life of John F. Kennedy hostile biography Sabato, Larry J. The Kennedy HalfCentury The Lasting Legacy of John F. Kennedy Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. Robert Kennedy And His Times 1978 Selverstone, Marc J., ed. A Companion to John F. Kennedy Whalen, Thomas J. JFK and His Enemies A Portrait of Power Primary sources Goldzwig, Steven R. and Dionisopoulos, George N., eds. In a Perilous Hour The Public Address of John F. Kennedy Kennedy, Jacqueline. Jacqueline Kennedy Historic Conversations on Life with John F. Kennedy . Hyperion Books. . Historiography and memory Abramson, Jill. Kennedy, the Elusive President, The New York Times Book Review October 22, 2013, notes that 40,000 books have been published about JFK Hellmann, John. The Kennedy Obsession The American Myth of JFK Santa Cruz, Paul H. Making JFK Matter Popular Memory and the 35th President xxiv, 363 pp. Selverstone, Marc J., ed. A Companion to John F. Kennedy , Topical essays by scholars focusing on the historiography External links Official John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site White House biography Media coverage Life Portrait of John F. Kennedy, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , November 5, 1999 Radio coverage of the assassination of President Kennedy as broadcast on WCCOAM Radio and CBS Radio Other John F. Kennedy A Resource Guide the Library of Congress Extensive Essays on JFK with shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady Miller Center of Public Affairs Kennedy Administration from Office of the Historian, United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. Category1917 births Category1963 deaths Category1963 murders in the United States Category20thcentury American politicians Category20thcentury American writers Category20thcentury Roman Catholics CategoryAlumni of the London School of Economics CategoryAmerican Roman Catholics CategoryAmerican anticommunists CategoryAmerican naval personnel of World War II CategoryAmerican people of Irish descent CategoryAmerican people of the Vietnam War CategoryArticles containing video clips CategoryAssassinated Presidents of the United States CategoryBarnstable, Massachusetts CategoryBouvier family CategoryBurials at Arlington National Cemetery CategoryChoate Rosemary Hall alumni CategoryDeaths by firearm in Texas CategoryDemocratic Party presidential nominees CategoryDemocratic Party Presidents of the United States CategoryDemocratic Party United States Senators CategoryDemocratic Party members of the United States House of Representatives CategoryHarvard University alumni CategoryIrish diaspora politicians CategoryJames Cardinal Gibbons Medal winners CategoryJournalists from Massachusetts CategoryKennedy family CategoryLaetare Medal recipients CategoryMassachusetts Democrats CategoryMembers of the United States House of Representatives from Massachusetts CategoryMilitary personnel from Massachusetts CategoryNational Rifle Association people CategoryPeople associated with the Boy Scouts of America CategoryPeople associated with the assassination of John F. Kennedy CategoryPeople from Brookline, Massachusetts CategoryPeople murdered in Texas CategoryPeople of the Congo Crisis CategoryPoliticians from Boston CategoryPresidential Medal of Freedom recipients CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryPulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography winners CategoryRecipients of the Navy and Marine Corps Medal CategorySpace advocates CategoryStar class sailors CategoryUnited States Navy officers CategoryUnited States Senators from Massachusetts CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1960 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1956 CategoryWriters fromBoston
Benjamin Harrison was an American politician and lawyer who served as the 23rd President of the United States from 1889 to 1893 he was the grandson of the ninth president, William Henry Harrison, creating the only grandfathergrandson duo to hold the office. Before ascending to the presidency, Harrison established himself as a prominent local attorney, Presbyterian church leader, and politician in Indianapolis, Indiana. During the American Civil War, he served in the Union Army as a colonel, and was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as a brevet brigadier general of volunteers in 1865. Harrison unsuccessfully ran for governor of Indiana in 1876. The Indiana General Assembly elected Harrison to a sixyear term in the U.S. Senate, where he served from 1881 to 1887. A Republican, Harrison was elected to the presidency in 1888, defeating the Democratic incumbent, Grover Cleveland. Hallmarks of Harrisons administration included unprecedented economic legislation, including the McKinley Tariff, which imposed historic protective trade rates, and the Sherman Antitrust Act. Harrison also facilitated the creation of the national forest reserves through an amendment to the Land Revision Act of 1891. During his administration six western states were admitted to the Union. In addition, Harrison substantially strengthened and modernized the U.S. Navy and conducted an active foreign policy, but his proposals to secure federal education funding as well as voting rights enforcement for African Americans were unsuccessful. Due in large part to surplus revenues from the tariffs, federal spending reached one billion dollars for the first time during his term. The spending issue in part led to the defeat of the Republicans in the 1890 midterm elections. Cleveland defeated Harrison for reelection in 1892, due to the growing unpopularity of the high tariff and high federal spending. Harrison returned to private life and his law practice in Indianapolis. In 1899 Harrison represented the Republic of Venezuela in their British Guiana boundary dispute against the United Kingdom. Harrison traveled to the court of Paris as part of the case and after a brief stay returned to Indianapolis. He died at his home in Indianapolis in 1901 of complications from influenza. Although many have praised Harrisons commitment to African Americans voting rights, scholars and historians generally regard his administration as belowaverage, and rank him in the bottom half among U.S. presidents. Historians, however, have not questioned Harrisons commitment to personal and official integrity. Family and education Coat of Arms of Benjamin Harrison Harrisons paternal ancestors were the Harrison family of Virginia, whose immigrant ancestor, Benjamin Harrison, arrived in Jamestown, Virginia, in 1630. Benjamin, the future president, was born on August 20, 1833, in North Bend, Ohio, the second of Elizabeth Ramsey and John Scott Harrisons eight children. Benjamin was also a grandson of U.S. President William Henry Harrison, the first governor of the Indiana Territory, and a greatgrandson of Benjamin Harrison V, a Virginia planter who signed the Declaration of Independence and succeeded Thomas Jefferson as governor of Virginia. Harrison was seven years old when his grandfather was elected U.S. president, but he did not attend the inauguration. Although Harrisons family was distinguished, his parents were not wealthy. John Scott Harrison, a twoterm U.S. congressman from Ohio, spent much of his farm income on his childrens education. Despite the familys modest resources, Harrisons boyhood was enjoyable, much of it spent outdoors fishing or hunting. Benjamin Harrisons early schooling took place in a log cabin near his home, but his parents later arranged for a tutor to help him with college preparatory studies. Fourteenyearold Harrison and his older brother, Irwin, enrolled in Farmers College near Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1847. He attended the college for two years and while there met his future wife, Caroline Carrie Lavinia Scott, a daughter of John Witherspoon Scott, the schools science professor who was also a Presbyterian minister. In 1850, Harrison transferred to Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, and graduated in 1852. He joined the Phi Delta Theta fraternity, which he used as a network for much of his life. He was also a member of Delta Chi, a law fraternity which permitted dual membership. Classmates included John Alexander Anderson, who became a sixterm U.S. congressman, and Whitelaw Reid Harrisons vice presidential running mate in 1892. At Miami, Harrison was strongly influenced by history and political economy professor Robert Hamilton Bishop. Harrison also joined a Presbyterian church at college and, like his mother, became a lifelong Presbyterian. Marriage and early career Benjamin Harrison c1850 After his college graduation in 1852, Harrison studied law with Judge Bellamy Storer of Cincinnati, but before he completed his studies, he returned to Oxford, Ohio, to marry Caroline Scott on October 20, 1853. Carolines father, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony. The Harrisons had two children, Russell Benjamin Harrison , and Mary Mamie Scott Harrison . Harrison and his wife, Caroline, returned to live at The Point, his fathers farm in southeastern Ohio, while he finished his law studies. Harrison was admitted to the Ohio bar in early 1854,the same year he sold property that he had inherited after the death of an aunt for 800 and used the funds to move with Caroline to Indianapolis, Indiana. Harrison began practicing law in the office of John H. Ray in 1854 and became a crier for the federal court in Indianapolis, for which he was paid 2.50 per day. He also served as a Commissioner for the U.S. Court of Claims. Harrison became a founding member and first president of both the University Club, a private gentlemens club in Indianapolis, and the Phi Delta Theta Alumni Club. Harrison and his wife became members and assumed leadership positions at Indianapoliss First Presbyterian Church. Having grown up in a Whig household, Harrison initially favored that partys politics, but joined the Republican Party shortly after its formation in 1856 and campaigned on behalf of the Republican presidential candidate, John C. Frmont. In 1857 Harrison was elected as the Indianapolis city attorney, a position that paid an annual salary of 400. In 1858, Harrison entered into a law partnership with William Wallace to form the law office of Wallace and Harrison. Two years later, in 1860, Harrison successfully ran as the Republican candidate for reporter of the Indiana Supreme Court. Harrison was an active supporter of the Republican Partys platform and served as Republican State Committees secretary. After Wallace, his law partner, was elected as county clerk in 1860, Harrison established a new firm with William Fishback that was named Fishback and Harrison. The new partners worked together until Harrison entered the Union Army after the start of the American Civil War. Civil War Brigadier General Harrison with other commanders of the XX Corps, 1865 In 1862, President Abraham Lincoln issued a call for more recruits for the Union Army Harrison wanted to enlist, but worried about how to support his young family. While visiting Governor Oliver Morton, Harrison found him distressed over the shortage of men answering the latest call. Harrison told the governor, If I can be of any service, I will go. Morton asked Harrison if he could help recruit a regiment, although he would not ask him to serve. Harrison recruited throughout northern Indiana to raise a regiment. Morton offered him the command, but Harrison declined, as he had no military experience. He was initially commissioned as a captain and company commander on July 22, 1862. Governor Morton commissioned Harrison as a colonel on August 7, 1862, and the newly formed 70th Indiana was mustered into Federal service on August 12, 1862. Once mustered, the regiment left Indiana to join the Union Army at Louisville, Kentucky. For much of its first two years, the 70th Indiana performed reconnaissance duty and guarded railroads in Kentucky and Tennessee. In 1864, Harrison and his regiment joined William T. Shermans Atlanta Campaign and moved to the front lines. On January 2, 1864, Harrison was promoted to command the 1st Brigade of the 1st Division of the XX Corps. He commanded the brigade at the battles of Resaca, Cassville, New Hope Church, Lost Mountain, Kennesaw Mountain, Marietta, Peachtree Creek and Atlanta. When Shermans main force began its March to the Sea, Harrisons brigade was transferred to the District of Etowah and participated in the Battle of Nashville. On January 23, 1865, President Lincoln nominated Harrison to the grade of brevet brigadier general of volunteers, to rank from that date, and the Senate confirmed the nomination on February 14, 1865. He rode in the Grand Review in Washington, D.C. before mustering out on June 8, 1865. Postwar career Indiana politics While serving in the Union Army in October 1864, Harrison was once again elected reporter of the Supreme Court of Indiana, although he did not seek the position, and served as the Courts reporter for four more years. The position was unsalaried and not a politically powerful one, but it did provide Harrison with a steady income for his work preparing and publishing court opinions, which he sold to the legal profession. Harrison also resumed his law practice in Indianapolis. He became a skilled orator and known as one of the states leading lawyers. In 1868 President Ulysses S. Grant appointed Harrison to represent the federal government in a civil suit filed by Lambdin P. Milligan, whose controversial wartime conviction for treason in 1864 led to the landmark U.S. Supreme Court case known as Ex parte Milligan . The civil case was referred to the U.S. Circuit Court for Indiana at Indianapolis, where it evolved into Milligan v. Hovey . Although the jury rendered a verdict in Milligans favor and he had sought hundreds of thousands of dollars in damages, state and federal statutes limited the amount the federal government had to award to Milligan to five dollars plus court costs. Benjamin Harrison Home in Indianapolis With his increasing reputation, local Republicans urged Harrison to run for Congress. He initially confined his political activities to speaking on behalf of other Republican candidates, a task for which he received high praises from his colleagues. In 1872, Harrison campaigned for the Republican nomination for governor of Indiana. Former governor Oliver Morton favored his opponent, Thomas M. Browne, and Harrison lost his bid for statewide office. He returned to his law practice and, despite the Panic of 1873, he was financially successful enough to build a grand new home in Indianapolis in 1874. He continued to make speeches on behalf of Republican candidates and policies. In 1876, when a scandal forced the original Republican nominee, Godlove Stein Orth, to drop out of the gubernatorial race, Harrison accepted the Republican Partys invitation to take his place on the ticket. Harrison centered his campaign on economic policy and favored deflating the national currency. He was ultimately defeated in a plurality by James D. Williams, losing by 5,084 votes out of a total 434,457 cast, but Harrison was able to build on his new prominence in state politics. When the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 reached Indianapolis, he gathered a citizen militia to make a show of support for owners and management, and helped to mediate an agreement between the workers and management and to prevent the strike from widening. When United States Senator Morton died in 1878, the Republicans nominated Harrison to run for the seat, but the party failed to gain a majority in the state legislature, which at that time elected senators the Democratic majority elected Daniel W. Voorhees instead. In 1879, President Hayes appointed Harrison to the Mississippi River Commission, which worked to develop internal improvements on the river. As a delegate to the 1880 Republican National Convention the following year, he was instrumental in breaking a deadlock on candidates, and James A. Garfield won the nomination. United States Senator Walter Q. Gresham, Harrisons rival within the Indiana Republican Party After Harrison led Indianas Republican delegation at the 1880 Republican National Convention, he was considered the states presumptive candidate for the U.S. Senate. He gave speeches in favor of Garfield in Indiana and New York, further raising his profile in the party. However, when the Republicans retook the majority in the state legislature, Harrisons election to a sixyear term in the U.S. Senate was threatened by Judge Walter Q. Gresham, his intraparty rival, but Harrison was ultimately chosen. After Garfields election as president in 1880, his administration offered Harrison a cabinet position, but Harrison declined in favor of continuing his service in the US. Senate. Harrison served in the Senate from March 4, 1881 to March 3, 1887 and chaired the U.S. Senate Committee on Transportation Routes to the Seaboard and the U.S. Senate Committee on Territories . In 1881, the major issue confronting Senator Harrison was the budget surplus. Democrats wished to reduce the tariff and limit the amount of money the government took in Republicans instead wished to spend the money on internal improvements and pensions for Civil War veterans. Harrison took his partys side and advocated for generous pensions for veterans and their widows. He also supported, unsuccessfully, aid for education of Southerners, especially the children of the freedmen he believed that education was necessary to help the black population rise to political and economic equality with whites. Harrison opposed the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, which his party supported, as he thought it violated existing treaties with China. In 1884, Harrison and Gresham competed for influence at the 1884 Republican National Convention the delegation ended up supporting James G. Blaine, the eventual nominee. In the Senate, Harrison achieved passage of his Dependent Pension Bill, only to see it vetoed by President Grover Cleveland. His efforts to further the admission of new western states were stymied by Democrats, who feared that the new states would elect Republicans to Congress. In 1885 the Democrats redistricted the Indiana state legislature, which resulted in an increased Democratic majority in 1886, despite an overall Republican majority statewide. In 1887, largely as a result of the Democratic gerrymandering of Indianas legislative districts, Harrison was defeated in his bid for reelection. Following a deadlock in the state senate, the state legislature eventually chose Democrat David Turpie as Harrisons successor in the U.S. Senate. Harrison returned to Indianapolis and resumed his law practice, but stayed active in state and national politics. Election of 1888 Harrison Morton campaign poster Nomination The initial favorite for the Republican nomination was the previous nominee, James G. Blaine of Maine. After Blaine wrote several letters denying any interest in the nomination, his supporters divided among other candidates, with John Sherman of Ohio as the leader among them. Others, including Chauncey Depew of New York, Russell Alger of Michigan, and Harrisons old nemesis Walter Q. Gresham, now a federal appellate court judge in Chicago, also sought the delegates support at the 1888 Republican National Convention. Blaine did not publicly endorse any of the candidates as a successor however, on March 1, 1888 he privately wrote that the one man remaining who in my judgment can make the best one is Benjamin Harrison. Harrison placed fifth on the first ballot, with Sherman in the lead, and the next few ballots showed little change. The Blaine supporters shifted their support among candidates they found acceptable, and when they shifted to Harrison, they found a candidate who could attract the votes of many other delegations. He was nominated as the partys presidential candidate on the eighth ballot, by a count of 544 to 108 votes. Levi P. Morton of New York was chosen as his running mate. Election over Cleveland Results of the 1888 election Harrisons opponent in the general election was incumbent President Grover Cleveland. Harrison reprised a more traditional frontporch campaign, abandoned by his immediate predecessors he received visiting delegations to Indianapolis and made ninety plus pronouncements from his home town. The Republicans campaigned heavily in favor of protective tariffs, turning out protectionist voters in the important industrial states of the North. The election focused on the swing states of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Harrisons home state of Indiana. Harrison and Cleveland split these four states, with Harrison winning in New York and Indiana. Voter turnout was 79.3, reflecting a large interest in the campaign nearly eleven million votes were cast. Although Harrison received 90,000 fewer popular votes than Cleveland, he carried the Electoral College 233 to 168. Allegations were made against Republicans for engaging in irregular ballot practices an example was described as Blocks of Five. On October 31 the Indiana Sentinel published a letter allegedly written by Harrisons friend and supporter, William Wade Dudley, to bribe voters in blocks of five to ensure Harrisons election. Harrison neither defended nor repudiated Dudley, but allowed him to remain on the campaign for the remaining few days. After the election Harrison never spoke to Dudley again. Although he had made no political bargains, his supporters had given many pledges upon his behalf. When Boss Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania, who rebuffed for a Cabinet position for his political support during the convention, heard that Harrison ascribed his narrow victory to Providence, Quay exclaimed that Harrison would never know how close a number of men were compelled to approach...the penitentiary to make him President. Harrison was known as the Centennial President because his inauguration celebrated the centenary of the first inauguration of George Washington in 1789. In congressional elections, the Republicans increased their membership in the House of Representatives by nineteen seats. Presidency 1889 1893 Inauguration of Benjamin Harrison, March 4, 1889. Cleveland held Harrisons umbrella Inauguration and cabinet Harrison was sworn into office on Monday, March 4, 1889 by Chief Justice Melville Fuller. His speech was brief half as long as that of his grandfather, William Henry Harrison, whose speech holds the record for the longest inaugural address of a U.S. president. In his speech, Benjamin Harrison credited the nations growth to the influences of education and religion, urged the cotton states and mining territories to attain the industrial proportions of the eastern states and promised a protective tariff. Concerning commerce, he said, If our great corporations would more scrupulously observe their legal obligations and duties, they would have less call to complain of the limitations of their rights or of interference with their operations. Harrison also urged early statehood for the territories and advocated pensions for veterans, a statement that was met with enthusiastic applause. In foreign affairs, Harrison reaffirmed the Monroe Doctrine as a mainstay of foreign policy, while urging modernization of the Navy and a merchant marine force. He gave his commitment to international peace through noninterference in the affairs of foreign governments. John Philip Sousas Marine Corps band played at the Inaugural Ball inside the Pension Building with a large crowd attending. After moving into the White House, Harrison noted, quite prophetically, There is only a door one that is never locked between the presidents office and what are not very accurately called his private apartments. There should be an executive office building, not too far away, but wholly distinct from the dwelling house. For everyone else in the public service there is an unroofed space between the bedroom and the desk. Harrison acted quite independently in selecting his cabinet, much to the dismay of the Republican bosses. He began by delaying the presumed nomination of James G. Blaine as Secretary of State so as to preclude Blaines involvement in the formation of the administration, as had occurred in President Garfields term. In fact, other than Blaine, the only Republican boss initially nominated was Redfield Proctor, as Secretary of War. Senator Shelby Culloms comment symbolizes Harrisons steadfast aversion to use federal positions for patronage I suppose Harrison treated me as well as he did any other Senator but whenever he did anything for me, it was done so ungraciously that the concession tended to anger rather than please. Harrisons selections shared particular alliances such as their service in the Civil War, Indiana citizenship and membership in the Presbyterian Church. Nevertheless, Harrison with these choices had alienated pivotal Republican operatives from New York to Pennsylvania to Iowa and prematurely compromised his political power and future. Harrisons normal schedule provided for two full cabinet meetings per week, as well as separate weekly oneonone meetings with each cabinet member. In June 1890, Harrisons Postmaster General John Wanamaker and several Philadelphia friends purchased a large new cottage at Cape May Point for Harrisons wife Caroline. Many believed the cottage gift appeared to be improper and amounted to a bribe for a cabinet position. Harrison made no comment on the matter until after two weeks when he said he had always intended to purchase the cottage once Caroline gave approval. On July 2, perhaps a little tardily to avoid suspicion, Harrison gave Wanamaker a check for 10,000 to pay for the cottage. Civil service reform and pensions Political football Civil service reform was a prominent issue following Harrisons election. Harrison had campaigned as a supporter of the merit system, as opposed to the spoils system. Although some of the civil service had been classified under the Pendleton Act by previous administrations, Harrison spent much of his first months in office deciding on political appointments. Congress was widely divided on the issue and Harrison was reluctant to address the issue in hope of preventing the alienation of either side. The issue became a political football of the time and was immortalized in a cartoon captioned What can I do when both parties insist on kicking Harrison appointed Theodore Roosevelt and Hugh Smith Thompson, both reformers, to the Civil Service Commission, but otherwise did little to further the reform cause. Eastman Johnsons portrait of Benjamin Harrison, c. 1890 1900 Harrison quickly saw the enactment of the Dependent and Disability Pension Act in 1890, a cause he had championed while in Congress. In addition to providing pensions to disabled Civil War veterans , the Act depleted some of the troublesome federal budget surplus. Pension expenditures reached 135million under Harrison, the largest expenditure of its kind to that point in American history, a problem exacerbated by Pension Bureau commissioner James R. Tanners expansive interpretation of the pension laws. An investigation into the Pension Bureau by Harrisons Secretary of Interior John W. Noble found evidence of lavish and illegal handouts under Tanner. Harrison, who privately believed that appointing Tanner had been a mistake, due to his apparent loose management style and tongue, asked Tanner to resign and replaced him with Green B. Raum. Raum was also accused of accepting loan payments in return for expediting pension cases. Harrison, having accepted a dissenting Congressional Republican investigation report that exonerated Raum, kept him in office for the rest of his administration. One of the first appointments Harrison was forced to reverse was that of James S. Clarkson as an assistant postmaster. Clarkson, who had expected a full cabinet position, began sabotaging the appointment from the outset, gaining the reputation for decapitating a fourth class postmaster every three minutes. Clarkson himself stated, I am simply on detail from the Republican Committee...I am most anxious to get through this task and leave. He resigned in September 1890. Tariff Harrison and the BillionDollar Congress are portrayed as wasting the surplus in this cartoon from Puck . The tariff levels had been a major political issue since before the Civil War, and they became the most dominant matter of the 1888 election. The high tariff rates had created a surplus of money in the Treasury, which led many Democrats to call for lowering them. Most Republicans preferred to maintain the rates, spend the surplus on internal improvements and eliminate some internal taxes. Representative William McKinley and Senator Nelson W. Aldrich framed the McKinley Tariff that would raise the tariff even higher, including making some rates intentionally prohibitive. At Secretary of State James Blaines urging, Harrison attempted to make the tariff more acceptable by urging Congress to add reciprocity provisions, which would allow the President to reduce rates when other countries reduced their rates on American exports. The tariff was removed from imported raw sugar, and sugar growers in the United States were given a two cent per pound subsidy on their production. Even with the reductions and reciprocity, the McKinley Tariff enacted the highest average rate in American history, and the spending associated with it contributed to the reputation of the BillionDollar Congress. Antitrust laws and the currency Senator John Sherman worked closely with Harrison, writing bills regulating monopolies and monetary policy. Members of both parties were concerned with the growth of the power of trusts and monopolies, and one of the first acts of the 51st Congress was to pass the Sherman Antitrust Act, sponsored by Senator John Sherman of Ohio. The Act passed by wide margins in both houses, and Harrison signed it into law. The Sherman Act was the first Federal act of its kind, and marked a new use of federal government power. While Harrison approved of the law and its intent, his administration was not particularly vigorous in enforcing it. However, the government successfully concluded a case during Harrisons time in office , and had initiated several other cases against trusts. One of the most volatile questions of the 1880s was whether the currency should be backed by gold and silver, or by gold alone. The issue cut across party lines, with western Republicans and southern Democrats joining together in the call for the free coinage of silver, and both parties representatives in the northeast holding firm for the gold standard. Because silver was worth less than its legal equivalent in gold, taxpayers paid their government bills in silver, while international creditors demanded payment in gold, resulting in a depletion of the nations gold supply. Owing to worldwide deflation in the late 19th century, however, a strict gold standard had resulted in reduction of incomes without the equivalent reduction in debts, pushing debtors and the poor to call for silver coinage as an inflationary measure. The silver coinage issue had not been much discussed in the 1888 campaign and Harrison is said to have favored a bimetallist position. However, his appointment of a silverite Treasury Secretary, William Windom, encouraged the free silver supporters. Harrison attempted to steer a middle course between the two positions, advocating a free coinage of silver, but at its own value, not at a fixed ratio to gold. This failed to facilitate a compromise between the factions. In July 1890, Senator Sherman achieved passage of a bill, the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, in both houses. Harrison thought that the bill would end the controversy, and he signed it into law. The effect of the bill, however, was the increased depletion of the nations gold supply, a problem that would persist until the second Cleveland administration resolved it. Civil rights Harrison with Secretary Blaine and Representative Henry Cabot Lodge off the coast of Maine, 1889 After regaining the majority in both Houses of Congress, some Republicans, led by Harrison, attempted to pass legislation to protect black Americans civil rights. Harrisons Attorney General, William H. H. Miller, through the Justice Department, ordered the prosecutions for violation of voting rights in the South however, white juries often failed to convict or indict violators. This prompted Harrison to urge Congress to pass legislation that would secure all our people a free exercise of the right of suffrage and every other civil right under the Constitution and laws. Harrison endorsed the proposed Federal Elections Bill written by Representative Henry Cabot Lodge and Senator George Frisbie Hoar in 1890, but the bill was defeated in the Senate. Following the failure to pass the bill, Harrison continued to speak in favor of African American civil rights in addresses to Congress. Most notably, on December 3, 1889, Harrison had gone before Congress and stated The colored people did not intrude themselves upon us they were brought here in chains and held in communities where they are now chiefly bound by a cruel slave code...when and under what conditions is the black man to have a free ballot When is he in fact to have those full civil rights which have so long been his in law When is that quality of influence which our form of government was intended to secure to the electors to be restored in many parts of our country where the colored population is large the people of that race are by various devices deprived of any effective exercise of their political rights and of many of their civil rights. The wrong does not expend itself upon those whose votes are suppressed. Every constituency in the Union is wronged. He severely questioned the states civil rights records, arguing that if states have the authority over civil rights, then we have a right to ask whether they are at work upon it. Harrison also supported a bill proposed by Senator Henry W. Blair, which would have granted federal funding to schools regardless of the students races. He also endorsed a proposed constitutional amendment to overturn the Supreme Court ruling in the Civil Rights Cases that declared much of the Civil Rights Act of 1875 unconstitutional. None of these measures gained congressional approval. National forests In March 1891 Congress enacted and Harrison signed the Land Revision Act of 1891. This legislation resulted from a bipartisan desire to initiate reclamation of surplus lands that had been, up to that point, granted from the public domain, for potential settlement or use by railroad syndicates. As the laws drafting was finalized, Section 24 was added at the behest of Harrison by his Secretary of the Interior John Noble, which read as follows That the President of the United States may, from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory having public land bearing forests, in any part of the public lands wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the President shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of such reservations and the limits thereof. Within a month of the enactment of this law Harrison authorized the first forest reserve, to be located on public domain adjacent to Yellowstone Park, in Wyoming. Other areas were so designated by Harrison, bringing the first forest reservations total to 22 million acres in his term. Harrison was also the first to give a prehistoric Indian Ruin, Casa Grande in Arizona, federal protection. Native American policy During Harrisons administration, the Lakota Sioux, previously confined to reservations in South Dakota, grew restive under the influence of Wovoka, a medicine man, who encouraged them to participate in a spiritual movement called the Ghost Dance. Many in Washington did not understand the predominantly religious nature of the Ghost Dance, and thought it was a militant movement being used to rally Native Americans against the government. On December 29, 1890, troops from the Seventh Cavalry clashed with the Sioux at Wounded Knee. The result was a massacre of at least 146 Sioux, including many women and children the dead Sioux were buried in a mass grave. In reaction Harrison directed Major General Nelson A. Miles to investigate and ordered 3500 federal troops to South Dakota the uprising was brought to an end. Wounded Knee is considered the last major American Indian battle in the 19th century. Harrisons general policy on American Indians was to encourage assimilation into white society and, despite the massacre, he believed the policy to have been generally successful. This policy, known as the allotment system and embodied in the Dawes Act, was favored by liberal reformers at the time, but eventually proved detrimental to American Indians as they sold most of their land at low prices to white speculators. Technology and naval modernization The , Americas first battleship, built in 1892 During Harrisons time in office, the United States was continuing to experience advances in science and technology. Harrison was the earliest President whose voice is known to be preserved. That was originally made on a wax phonograph cylinder in 1889 by Gianni Bettini. Harrison also had electricity installed in the White House for the first time by Edison General Electric Company, but he and his wife would not touch the light switches for fear of electrocution and would often go to sleep with the lights on. Over the course of his administration Harrison marshaled the countrys technology to clothe the nation with a credible naval power. When he took office there were only two commissioned warships in the Navy. In his inaugural address he said, construction of a sufficient number of warships and their necessary armaments should progress as rapidly as is consistent with care and perfection. Harrisons Secretary of the Navy Benjamin F. Tracy spearheaded the rapid construction of vessels, and within a year congressional approval was obtained for building of the warships , , and . By 1898, with the help of the Carnegie Corporation, no less than ten modern warships, including steel hulls and greater displacements and armaments, had transformed the United States into a legitimate naval power. Seven of these had begun during the Harrison term. Foreign policy Latin America and Samoa Harrison and Secretary of State Blaine were often not the most cordial of friends, but harmonized in an aggressive foreign policy and commercial reciprocity with other nations. Blaines persistent medical problems warranted more of a handson effort by Harrison in the conduct of foreign policy. In San Francisco, while on tour of the United States in 1891, Harrison proclaimed that the United States was in a new epoch of trade and that the expanding navy would protect oceanic shipping and increase American influence and prestige abroad. The First International Conference of American States met in Washington in 1889 Harrison set an aggressive agenda including customs and currency integration and named a bipartisan delegation to the conference, led by John B. Henderson and Andrew Carnegie. The conference failed to achieve any diplomatic breakthrough, due in large part to an atmosphere of suspicion fostered by the Argentinian delegation. It did succeed in establishing an information center that became the Pan American Union. In response to the diplomatic bust, Harrison and Blaine pivoted diplomatically and initiated a crusade for tariff reciprocity with Latin American nations the Harrison administration concluded eight reciprocity treaties among these countries. On another front, Harrison sent Frederick Douglass as ambassador to Haiti, but failed in his attempts to establish a naval base there. In 1889, the United States, the United Kingdom and the German Empire were locked in a dispute over control of the Samoan Islands. Historian George H. Rydens research indicates Harrison played a key role in determining the status of this Pacific outpost by taking a firm stand on every aspect of Samoa conference negotiations this included selection of the local ruler, refusal to allow an indemnity for Germany, as well as the establishment of a three power protectorate, a first for the U.S.. These arrangements facilitated the future dominant power of the U.S. in the Pacific Secretary of State Blaine was absent due to complication of lumbago. European embargo of U.S. pork Throughout the 1880s various European countries had imposed a ban on importation of United States pork out of an unconfirmed concern of trichinosis at issue was over one billion pounds of pork products with a value of 80 million . Harrison engaged Whitelaw Reid, minister to France, and William Walter Phelps, minister to Germany, to restore these exports for the country without delay. Harrison also successfully asked the congress to enact the Meat Inspection Act to eliminate the accusations of product compromise. The president also partnered with Agriculture Secretary Rusk to threaten Germany with retaliation by initiating an embargo in the U.S. against Germanys highly demanded beet sugar. By September 1891 Germany relented, and was soon followed by Denmark, France and AustriaHungary. Crises in Aleutian Islands and Chile The first international crisis Harrison faced arose from disputed fishing rights on the Alaskan coast. Canada claimed fishing and sealing rights around many of the Aleutian Islands, in violation of U.S. law. As a result, the United States Navy seized several Canadian ships. In 1891, the administration began negotiations with the British that would eventually lead to a compromise over fishing rights after international arbitration, with the British government paying compensation in 1898. In 1891, a diplomatic crisis emerged in Chile, otherwise known as the Baltimore Crisis. The American minister to Chile, Patrick Egan, granted asylum to Chileans who were seeking refuge during the 1891 Chilean Civil War. Egan, previously a militant Irish immigrant to the U.S., was motivated by a personal desire to thwart Great Britains influence in Chile his action increased tensions between Chile and the United States, which began in the early 1880s when Secretary Blaine had alienated the Chileans in the War of the Pacific. Attack on sailors from the USS Baltimore spawned the 1891 Chilean crisis. The crisis began in earnest when sailors from the took shore leave in Valparaiso and a fight ensued, resulting in the deaths of two American sailors and the arrest of three dozen others. The Baltimores captain, Winfield Schley, based on the nature of the sailors wounds, insisted the sailors had been bayonetattacked by Chilean police without provocation. With Blaine incapacitated, Harrison drafted a demand for reparations. The Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs Manuel Matta replied that Harrisons message was erroneous or deliberately incorrect, and said that the Chilean government was treating the affair the same as any other criminal matter. Tensions increased to the brink of war Harrison threatened to break off diplomatic relations unless the United States received a suitable apology, and said the situation required, grave and patriotic consideration. The president also remarked, If the dignity as well as the prestige and influence of the United States are not to be wholly sacrificed, we must protect those who in foreign ports display the flag or wear the colors. The Navy was also placed on a high level of preparedness. A recuperated Blaine made brief conciliatory overtures to the Chilean government which had no support in the administration he then reversed course, joined the chorus for unconditional concessions and apology by the Chileans, who ultimately obliged, and war was averted. Theodore Roosevelt later applauded Harrison for his use of the big stick in the matter. Annexation of Hawaii In the last days of his administration, Harrison dealt with the issue of Hawaiian annexation. Following a coup dtat against Queen Liliuokalani, the new government of Hawaii led by Sanford Dole petitioned for annexation by the United States. Harrison was interested in expanding American influence in Hawaii and in establishing a naval base at Pearl Harbor but had not previously expressed an opinion on annexing the islands. The United States consul in Hawaii John L. Stevens recognized the new government on February 1, 1893 and forwarded their proposals to Washington. With just one month left before leaving office, the administration signed a treaty on February 14 and submitted it to the Senate the next day with Harrisons recommendation. The Senate failed to act, and President Cleveland withdrew the treaty shortly after taking office. Cabinet FileBHarrison cabinet.jpgthumb350pxHarrisons cabinet in 1889Front row, left to right Harrison , William Windom, John Wanamaker, Redfield Proctor, James G. BlaineBack row, left to right William H. H. Miller, John W. Noble, Jeremiah M. Rusk, Benjamin F. Tracy Judicial appointments Harrison appointed four Supreme Court justices, including David Josiah Brewer. Harrison appointed four justices to the Supreme Court of the United States. The first was David Josiah Brewer, a judge on the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. Brewer, the nephew of Justice Field, had previously been considered for a cabinet position. Shortly after Brewers nomination, Justice Matthews died, creating another vacancy. Harrison had considered Henry Billings Brown, a Michigan judge and admiralty law expert, for the first vacancy and now nominated him for the second. For the third vacancy, which arose in 1892, Harrison nominated George Shiras. Shirass appointment was somewhat controversial because his age sixty was older than usual for a newly appointed Justice. Shiras also drew the opposition of Senator Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania because they were in different factions of the Pennsylvania Republican party, but his nomination was nonetheless approved. Finally, at the end of his term, Harrison nominated Howell Edmunds Jackson to replace Justice Lamar, who died in January 1893. Harrison knew the incoming Senate would be controlled by Democrats, so he selected Jackson, a respected Tennessee Democrat with whom he was friendly to ensure his nominee would not be rejected. Jacksons nomination was indeed successful, but he died after only two years on the Court. In addition to his Supreme Court appointments, Harrison appointed ten judges to the courts of appeals, two judges to the circuit courts, and 26 judges to the district courts. States admitted to the Union Six new states were admitted to the Union while Harrison was in office North DakotaNovember 2, 1889 South DakotaNovember 2, 1889 MontanaNovember 8, 1889 WashingtonNovember 11, 1889 IdahoJuly 3, 1890 WyomingJuly 10, 1890 More states were admitted during Harrisons presidency than any other. Vacations and travel Harrison attended a grand, threeday centennial celebration of George Washingtons inauguration in New York City on April 30, 1889, and made the following remarks We have come into the serious but always inspiring presence of Washington. He was the incarnation of duty and he teaches us today this great lesson that those who would associate their names with events that shall outlive a century can only do so by high consecration to duty. Selfseeking has no public observance or anniversary. The Harrisons made many trips out of the capital, which included speeches at most stops including Philadelphia, New England, Indianapolis and Chicago. The President typically made his best impression speaking before large audiences, as opposed to more intimate settings. The most notable of his presidential trips, theretofore unequaled, was a fiveweek tour of the west in the spring of 1891, aboard a lavishly outfitted train. Harrison enjoyed a number of short trips out of the capital usually for hunting to nearby Virginia or Maryland. During the hot Washington summers, the Harrisons took refuge in Deer Park, Maryland and Cape May Point, New Jersey. In 1890, John Wanamaker joined with other Philadelphia devotees of the Harrisons and made a gift to them of a summer cottage at Cape May. Harrison, though appreciative, was uncomfortable with the appearance of impropriety a month later, he paid Wanamaker 10,000 as reimbursement to the donors. Nevertheless, Harrisons opponents made the gift the subject of national ridicule, and Mrs. Harrison and the president were vigorously criticized. Reelection campaign in 1892 Official White House portrait of Benjamin Harrison, painted by Eastman Johnson The treasury surplus had evaporated and the nations economic health was worsening precursors to the eventual Panic of 1893. Congressional elections in 1890 had gone against the Republicans and although Harrison had cooperated with Congressional Republicans on legislation, several party leaders withdrew their support for him because of his adamant refusal to give party members the nod in the course of his executive appointments. Specifically, Thomas C. Platt, Matthew S. Quay, Thomas B. Reed and James Clarkson quietly organized the Grievance Committee, the ambition of which was to initiate a dumpHarrison offensive. They solicited the support of Blaine, without effect however, and Harrison in reaction resolved to run for reelection seemingly forced to choose one of two options become a candidate or forever wear the name of a political coward. It was clear that Harrison would not be renominated unanimously. Many of Harrisons detractors persisted in pushing for an incapacitated Blaine, though he announced that he was not a candidate in February 1892. Some party leaders still hoped to draft Blaine into running, and speculation increased when he resigned at the 11th hour as Secretary of State in June. At the convention in Minneapolis, Harrison prevailed on the first ballot, but encountered significant opposition. The Democrats renominated former President Cleveland, making the 1892 election a rematch of the one four years earlier. The tariff revisions of the past four years had made imported goods so expensive that now many voters shifted to the reform position. Many westerners, traditionally Republican voters, defected to the new Populist Party candidate, James Weaver, who promised free silver, generous veterans pensions, and an eighthour work day. The effects of the suppression of the Homestead Strike rebounded against the Republicans as well, although the federal government did not take action. Harrisons wife Caroline began a critical struggle with tuberculosis earlier in 1892 and two weeks before the election, on October 25, it took her life. Their daughter Mary Harrison McKee assumed the role of First Lady after her mothers death. Mrs. Harrisons terminal illness and the fact that both candidates had served in the White House called for a low key campaign, and resulted in neither of the candidates actively campaigning personally. Cleveland ultimately won the election by 277 electoral votes to Harrisons 145, and also won the popular vote by 5,556,918 to 5,176,108 this was the most decisive presidential election in 20 years. It gave Harrison the distinction of being the only President whose predecessor and successor were the same man. Postpresidency and death Grave of President Harrison and his two wives in Indianapolis, Indiana After he left office, Harrison visited the Worlds Columbian Exposition in Chicago in June 1893. After the Expo, Harrison returned to his home in Indianapolis. Harrison had been elected a companion of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States in 1882, and was elected as commander of the Ohio Commandery on May 3, 1893. For a few months in 1894, Harrison lived in San Francisco, California, where he gave law lectures at Stanford University. In 1896, some of Harrisons friends in the Republican party tried to convince him to seek the presidency again, but he declined. He traveled around the nation making appearances and speeches in support of William McKinleys candidacy for president. From July 1895 to March 1901 Harrison served on the Board of Trustees of Purdue University, where Harrison Hall, a dormitory, was named in his honor. He wrote a series of articles about the federal government and the presidency which were republished in 1897 as a book titled This Country of Ours . In 1896, Harrison at age 62 remarried, to Mary Scott Lord Dimmick, the widowed 37yearold niece and former secretary of his deceased wife. Harrisons two adult children, Russell, 41 years old at the time, and Mary McKee, 38, disapproved of the marriage and did not attend the wedding. Benjamin and Mary had one child together, Elizabeth . In 1898, Harrison served as an attorney for the Republic of Venezuela in their British Guiana boundary dispute with the United Kingdom. An international trial was agreed upon he filed an 800page brief and traveled to Paris where he spent more than 25 hours in court on Venezuelas behalf. Although he lost the case, his legal arguments won him international renown. In 1899 Harrison attended the First Peace Conference at The Hague. Harrison developed what was thought to be influenza in February 1901. He was treated with steam vapor inhalation and oxygen, but his condition worsened. He died from pneumonia at his home in Indianapolis on Wednesday, March 13, 1901, at the age of 67. Harrisons remains are interred in Indianapoliss Crown Hill Cemetery, next to the remains of his first wife, Caroline. After her death in 1948, Mary Dimmick Harrison, his second wife, was buried beside him. Historical reputation and memorials According to historian R. Hal Williams, Harrison had a widespread reputation for personal and official integrity. Closely scrutinized by Democrats, Harrisons reputation was largely intact when he left the White House. Having an advantage few 19th Century Presidents had, Harrisons own party, the Republicans, controlled Congress, while his administration actively advanced a Republican program of a higher tariff, moderate control of corporations, protecting African American voting rights, a generous Civil War pension, and compromising over the controversial silver issue. Historians have not raised serious questions about Harrisons own integrity or the integrity of his administration. Following the Panic of 1893, Harrison became more popular in retirement. His legacy among historians is scant, and general accounts of his period inaccurately treat Harrison as a cipher. More recently, historians have recognized the importance of the Harrison administration and Harrison himself in the new foreign policy of the late nineteenth century. The administration faced challenges throughout the hemisphere, in the Pacific, and in relations with the European powers, involvements that would be taken for granted in the twenty first century. Harrisons presidency belongs properly to the 19th century, but he clearly pointed the way to the modern presidency that would emerge under William McKinley. The bipartisan Sherman AntiTrust Act signed into law by Harrison remains in effect over 120 years later and was the most important legislation passed by the Fiftyfirst Congress.Harrisons support for African American voting rights and education would be the last significant attempts to protect civil rights until the 1930s. Harrisons tenacity at foreign policy was emulated by politicians such as Theodore Roosevelt.Batten, p. 209 The 1st Harrison stampIssue of 1902 Harrison was memorialized on several postage stamps. The first was a 13cent stamp issued on November 18, 1902, with the engraved likeness of Harrison modeled after a photo provided by his widow. In all Harrison has been honored on six U.S. Postage stamps, more than most other U.S. Presidents. Harrison also was featured on the fivedollar National Bank Notes from the third charter period, beginning in 1902. In 2012, a dollar coin with his image, part of the Presidential 1 Coin Program, was issued. In 1908, the people of Indianapolis erected the Benjamin Harrison memorial statue, created by Charles Niehaus and Henry Bacon, in honor of Harrisons lifetime achievements as military leader, U.S. Senator, and President of the United States.INgov, Accessdate 09182012 The statue occupies a site on the south edge of University Park, facing the Birch Bayh Federal Building and United States Courthouse across New York Avenue. In 1942, a Liberty Ship, the SS Benjamin Harrison , was named in his honor. In 1951, Harrisons home was opened to the public as a library and museum. It had been used as a dormitory for a music school from 1937 to 1950. The house was designated as a National Historic Landmark in 1964. Theodore Roosevelt dedicated Fort Benjamin Harrison in the former presidents honor in 1906. It is located in Lawrence, Indiana, a northeastern suburb of Indianapolis. The federal government decommissioned Fort Harrison in 1991 and transferred 1,700 of its 2,500 acres to Indianas state government in 1995 to establish Fort Harrison State Park. The site has been redeveloped to include residential neighborhoods and a golf course. See also List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience Notes References Sources Books Kinzer, Donald L., Benjamin Harrison and the Politics of Availability in Rhodes, James Ford. History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 1877 1896 online complete old, factual and heavily political, by winner of Pulitzer Prize Articles Further reading Debs, Eugene V. General Benjamin Harrison Relentless Foe of Labor A Democratic Campaign Speech in Terre Haute, IN, Oct. 27, 1888, Terre Haute Weekly Gazette, Nov. 1, 1888, section 2, pp. 1, 4. Dewey, Davis R. National Problems 1880 1897 Morgan, H. Wayne, From Hayes to McKinley National Party Politics, 1877 1896 Oberholtzer, Ellis Paxson. A History of the United States since the Civil War. Volume V, 1888 1901 . Primary sources Harrison, Benjamin. Speeches of Benjamin Harrison, Twentythird President of the United States , compiled by Charles Hedges. Volwiler, Albert T., ed. The Correspondence between Benjamin Harrison and James G. Blaine, 1882 1893 External links Official Benjamin Harrison Presidential Site White House biography Media coverage Other Benjamin Harrison Resource Guide, Library of Congress Benjamin Caroline Scott Harrison Collection, Miami University Libraries Benjamin Harrison Collection, 1853 1943, at the Indiana Historical Society Essay on Harrison and each member of his cabinet and First Lady, Miller Center of Public Affairs Life Portrait of Benjamin Harrison, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , August 20, 1999 Recording of an 1889 Harrison speech Vincent Voice Library, Michigan State University Collection of Benjamin Harrisons Personal Letters Manuscripts Category1833 births Category1901 deaths CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryAmerican Presbyterians CategoryBurials at Crown Hill Cemetery CategoryDeaths from influenza CategoryDeaths from pneumonia Benjamin CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryIndiana Republicans CategoryInfectious disease deaths in Indiana CategoryMiami University alumni CategoryPeople from Hamilton County, Ohio CategoryPoliticians from Indianapolis CategoryPeople of Indiana in the American Civil War CategoryPeople of Ohio in the American Civil War CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party United States Senators CategorySons of the American Revolution CategoryStanford Law School faculty CategoryUnion Army colonels CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1888 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1892 CategoryUnited States Senators from Indiana Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury Presbyterians Category20thcenturyPresbyterians
John Adams was an American patriot who served as the second President of the United States and the first Vice President . He was a lawyer, diplomat, statesman, political theorist, and, as a Founding Father, a leader of the movement for American independence from Great Britain. He was also a dedicated diarist and correspondent, particularly with his wife and closest advisor Abigail. John Adams collaborated with his cousin, revolutionary leader Samuel Adams, but he established his own prominence prior to the American Revolution. After the Boston Massacre, he provided a successful legal defense of the accused British soldiers, in the face of severe local antiBritish sentiment and driven by his devotion to the right to counsel and the protection of innocence. Adams was a delegate from Massachusetts to the Continental Congress, where he played a leading role in persuading Congress to declare independence. He assisted Thomas Jefferson in drafting the Declaration of Independence in 1776, and was its foremost advocate in the Congress. As a diplomat in Europe, he helped negotiate the eventual peace treaty with Great Britain, and acquired vital governmental loans from Amsterdam bankers. Adams was the primary author of the Massachusetts Constitution in 1780. This influenced the development of Americas own constitution, as did his earlier Thoughts on Government . Adamss credentials as a revolutionary secured for him two terms as President George Washingtons vice president and also his own election in 1796 as the second president. In his single term as president, he encountered fierce criticism from the Jeffersonian Republicans, as well as the dominant faction in his own Federalist Party, led by his rival Alexander Hamilton. Adams signed the controversial Alien and Sedition Acts, and built up the army and navy in the face of an undeclared naval QuasiWar with France. The major accomplishment of his presidency was a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the face of Hamiltons opposition. Due to his strong posture on defense, Adams is often called the father of the American Navy. He was the first U.S. president to reside in the executive mansion, now known as the White House. In 1800, Adams lost reelection to Thomas Jefferson and retired to Massachusetts. He eventually resumed his friendship with Jefferson upon the latters own retirement by initiating a correspondence which lasted fourteen years. He and his wife established a family of politicians, diplomats, and historians now referred to as the Adams political family. Adams was the father of John Quincy Adams, the sixth President of the United States. He died on the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, and the same day as Jefferson. Modern historians in the aggregate have favorably ranked his administration. Early life and education Childhood altSmall wooden house with redbrick chimney in the middle John Adams was born on October 30, 1735 to John Adams Sr. and Susanna Boylston . He had two younger brothers, Peter and Elihu. Adams birthplace was then in Braintree, Massachusetts , and is preserved at Adams National Historical Park. Adams mother was from a leading medical family of presentday Brookline, Massachusetts.Ferling, ch. 1. His father was a deacon in the Congregational Church, a farmer, a cordwainer, and a lieutenant in the militia. His greatgrandfather, Henry Adams, emigrated to Massachusetts from Braintree, Essex, England around 1638. John Sr. also served as a selectman and supervised the building of schools and roads. Adams often praised his father and recalled their close relationship. Though raised in modest surroundings, Adams felt an acute responsibility to live up to his familys heritage of reverence. He was a direct descendant of Puritans who came to the American wilderness in the 1630s, established a colonial presence in America, and profoundly affected the culture, laws, and traditions of their region. Journalist Richard Brookhiser wrote that Adams Puritan ancestors believed they lived in the Bible. England under the Stuarts was Egypt they were Israel fleeing ... to establish a refuge for godliness, a city upon a hill.Brookhiser, Richard. . Americas First Dynasty. The Adamses, 1735 1918 . The Free Press. p. 13. By the time of John Adams birth in 1735, Puritan tenets such as predestination were no longer as widely accepted, and many of their stricter practices had moderated with time, but Adams considered them bearers of freedom, a cause that still had a holy urgency. It was a value system which he believed in and wished to live up to. Adams emphatically recalled that his parents held every Species of Libertinage in... Contempt and horror, and portrayed pictures of disgrace, or baseness and of Ruin from any debauchery. Adams, as the eldest child, was under a mandate from his parents to obtain a formal education. This began at age six at a Dame school for boys and girls, which was conducted at a teachers home and centered upon The New England Primer . Shortly thereafter, Adams attended Braintree Latin School under Joseph Cleverly, where studies included Latin, rhetoric, logic, and arithmetic. Adams reflections on early education were in the negative mostly, including incidents of truancy, a dislike for his master, and a desire to become a farmer. All questions on the matter ended when his father commanded that he remain in school saying, You shall comply with my desires. Deacon Adams also retained a new school master named Joseph Marsh, and his son responded positively. College education and adulthood At age sixteen, Adams entered Harvard College in 1751. He studied under Joseph Mayhew. He did not share his fathers expectation that he become a minister. After graduating in 1755 with an A.B. degree, he taught school for a few years in Worcester, Massachusetts while pondering his permanent vocation. In the next four years, he discerned a passion for prestige, saying that he craved Honour or Reputation and more defference from his fellows and, at age twentyone, he was determined to become a great Man. He decided to become a lawyer to further those ends, writing his father that he found among lawyers noble and gallant achievements but, among the clergy, the pretended sanctity of some absolute dunces. Doctrinally, he later became a Unitarian, and dropped belief in predestination, eternal damnation, the divinity of Christ, and most other Calvinist beliefs of his Puritan ancestors. Nevertheless, his remnant Puritanism frequently prompted reservations about his hunger for fame, which he once referred to as mere trumpery, and he questioned his not properly attending to the happiness of his fellow men. The French and Indian War began in 1754 and Adams began to struggle with the issue of a young mans responsibility in the conflict contemporaries of his social position were largely spectators, while those who were less solvent joined the battle as a means to make some money. Adams later said, I longed more ardently to be a Soldier than I ever did to be a Lawyer. He was acutely aware that he was the first in his family that degenerated from the virtues of the house so far as not to have been an officer in the militia. Law practice and marriage altWoman with deep black hair and dark eyes wearing a blue and pink dress Adams followed the usual course of reading the law in order to obtain his license to practice. In 1756, he became an apprentice in the office of John Putnam, a leading lawyer in Worcester. In 1758, he earned an A.M. from Harvard, and the following year was admitted to the Massachusetts bar, having completed his studies under Putnam. From an early age, he developed the habit of writing descriptions of events and impressions of men which are scattered through his diary, which included his report of the 1761 argument of James Otis Jr. in the Massachusetts Superior Court as to the legality of Writs of Assistance. Otiss argument inspired Adams to the cause of the American colonies. In 1763, he had published seven essays in Boston newspapers, treatises that represented his forging into the convoluted realm of political theory. The essays were offered anonymously, with Adams using the nom de plume Humphrey Ploughjogger this author reappeared in the Boston Gazette in 1765 to oppose the Stamp Act. Adams was initially not as well known as his cousin Samuel, but his influence emerged through his work as a constitutional lawyer and his indepth analysis of historical examples, together with his dedication to the principles of republicanism. Even so, Adams often found his inborn contentiousness to be a constraint in his political career.Ferling ch. 3. Adams married his third cousin Abigail Smith on October 25, 1764. Her parents were Elizabeth Quincy and Rev. William Smith, a Congregational minister at Weymouth, Massachusetts. John and Abigail had six children Abigail Nabby in 1765, future president John Quincy Adams in 1767, Susanna in 1768, Charles in 1770, Thomas in 1772, and Elizabeth in 1777. Susanna died after about a year, while Elizabeth was stillborn. Career before the Revolution Opponent of Stamp Act 1765 altMan in dark gray clothing with dark hair Adams first rose to prominence leading widespread opposition to the Stamp Act of 1765, imposed by the British Parliament without consulting the American legislatures, and requiring payment of a direct tax by the colonies for various stamped documents. Adams authored the Braintree Instructions in 1765, a letter sent to the representatives of Braintree in the Massachusetts legislature which served as a model for other towns instructions.Ferling, ch. 3. In the piece, he explained that the Stamp Act should be opposed since it denied two fundamental rights guaranteed to all Englishmen, and which all free men deserved rights to be taxed only by consent and to be tried only by a jury of ones peers. The instructions were a succinct and forthright defense of colonial rights and liberties. In August 1765, he reprised his pen name Humphrey Ploughjogger and contributed four articles to the Boston Gazette . He delivered a speech in December before the governor and council in which he pronounced the Stamp Act invalid on the ground that Massachusetts had not given its assent to it, being without representation in Parliament. He later observed that many protests were sparked by an oftreprinted sermon of Boston minister Jonathan Mayhew, invoking Romans 13 to justify insurrection. In 1766, a town meeting of Braintree elected John Adams as a selectman. Adams strongly supported the right of all Americans to jury trials. Adams protested the 1765 passage of the Stamp Act, which gave jurisdiction to British Vice Admiralty Courts, rather than common law courts. Stamp Act and the beginning of political activism, John Adams Historical Society, accessed 2016. Many colonists, including Adams, believed these courts, which operated without a jury, were corrupt and unfair. The Declaration of Independence, Independence Hall Association, 2016. Adams moved the family to Boston in April 1768, renting a clapboard house on Brattle Street that was known locally as the White House. He and Abigail and the children lived there for a year, then moved to Cold Lane still later, they moved again to a larger house in Brattle Square in the center of the city. Counsel for the British Boston Massacre On March 5, 1770, a street confrontation resulted in British soldiers killing five civilians in what came to be known as the Boston Massacre.Ferling, ch. 4. The accused soldiers were arrested on criminal charges and had trouble finding legal representation. Adams ultimately agreed to defend them, though he feared that it would hurt his reputation. In arguing their case, Adams made his legendary statement regarding jury decisions Facts are stubborn things and whatever may be our wishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passion, they cannot alter the state of facts and evidence. He also expounded upon Blackstones Ratio It is more important that innocence be protected than it is that guilt be punished, for guilt and crimes are so frequent in this world that they cannot all be punished. But if innocence itself is brought to the bar and condemned, perhaps to die, then the citizen will say, whether I do good or whether I do evil is immaterial, for innocence itself is no protection, and if such an idea as that were to take hold in the mind of the citizen that would be the end of security whatsoever. Adams won an acquittal for six of the soldiers. Two of them who had fired directly into the crowd were charged with murder but were convicted only of manslaughter. Adams was paid a small sum by his clients.Private Thoughts of a Founding Father . Life . June 30, 1961. p. 82. Biographer John E. Ferling suggests that Adams made the most of juror selection during the jury selection stage of the trial, saying that Adams expertly exercised his right to challenge individual jurors and contrived what amounted to a packed jury. Not only were several jurors closely tied through business arrangements to the British army, but five ultimately became Loyalist exiles. While benefitting from prosecutorial mismanagement, Adams performed brilliantly. Hiller B. Zobel is a scholar who has closely studied the trial, and he concluded, we can be fairly sure that before a single witness had been sworn, the outcome of the trial was certain. Ferling also surmises that Adams may have been encouraged to take the case in exchange for political office one of Bostons seats opened three months later in the Massachusetts legislature, and Adams was the towns first choice to fill the vacancy. His law practice increased greatly from this exposure, as did the demands on his time. In 1771, he moved Abigail and the children to Braintree, but he kept his office in Boston, saying, I shall spend more Time in my Office than ever I did. He also noted on the day of the familys move, Now my family is away, I feel no Inclination at all, no Temptation, to be any where but at my Office. I am in it by 6 in the Morning I am in it at 9 at night.... In the Evening, I can be alone at my Office, and no where else. I never could in my family. Nevertheless, after some time in the capital, he became disenchanted with the rural and vulgar Braintree as a home for his family. In August 1772, therefore, Adams moved his family back to Boston. He purchased a large brick house on Queen Street, not far from his office. In 1774, Adams and Abigail returned the family to the farm due to the increasingly unstable situation in Boston, and Braintree remained their permanent Massachusetts home. Objections to British Parliaments authority Governor Thomas Hutchinson and his judges until 1772 received their salaries from the Massachusetts legislature. The Coercive Acts and the Tea Act were then passed by Parliament, and the British Crown assumed payment of those wages, drawn from customs revenues imposed upon that colony. According to biographer Ferling, the British government thus singled out Massachusetts for reprisals of previous rebellion and hoped in the process to force the other colonies into line. Boston radicals protested and asked John Adams to proclaim their objections. In Two Replies of the Massachusetts House of Representatives to Governor Hutchinson Adams argued that the colonists had never been under the sovereignty of Parliament. Their original charter, as well as their allegiance, was exclusively with the king. If a workable line could not be drawn between parliamentary sovereignty and the total independence of the colonies, he continued, the colonies would have no other choice but independence from England. In 1775, in response to a set of essays by Daniel Leonard defending Hutchinsons arguments for the absolute authority of Parliament over the colonies, Adams composed a series of essays addressed to the people living in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. In them, he gave a pointbypoint refutation of Leonards essays, and then provided one of the most extensive and learned arguments made by the colonists against British imperial policy. It was a systematic attempt by Adams to describe the origins, nature, and jurisdiction of British concepts of constitutionality. Adams used his wide knowledge of English and colonial legal history to argue that the provincial legislatures were fully sovereign over their own internal affairs, and that the colonies were connected to Great Britain only through the king.Ferling, ch. 6.. The Boston Tea Party, a historic demonstration against the British enactments, took place on December 16, 1773. The British schooner Dartmouth , loaded with tea to be traded subject to the new tea tax, had previously dropped anchor. By 900 PM, the work of the protesters was done they had demolished 342 chests of tea worth about ten thousand pounds todays equivalent of about 1 million. Adams was briefly retained by the Dartmouth owners regarding the question of their liability for the destroyed shipment. Adams applauded the destruction of the tea. There had been no choice, he thought, and he called the defiant boarding of the vessels and the quick obliteration of the dutied beverage the grandest Event in the history of the colonial protest movement. He wrote the following day that the destruction of the dutied tea by the protesters had been an absolutely and indispensably necessary action.Ferling, ch. 7. Continental Congress Member of Continental Congress alt56 figures stand or sit in a room. Five lay papers on a table. Massachusetts sent Adams to the first and second Continental Congresses in 1774 and from 1775 to 1777 respectively. The Massachusetts delegation resolved to assume a largely passive role in the first Congress. But Adams felt strongly that the conservatives of 1774, men like Joseph Galloway and James Duane, were no different than Hutchinson and Peter Oliver, and he denigrated such men, telling Abigail that Spiders, Toads, Snakes, are their only proper Emblems. Yet at that point his views were similar to those of conservative John Dickinson. He sought repeal of objectionable policies, but at the early stage he continued to see positive benefits for America remaining part of the British empire. In 1774, the First Continental Congress was convened in response to the passage of the Intolerable Acts. Adams agreed to attend, despite an emotional plea from his friend Jonathan Sewall to do otherwise. At the Congress, Adams renewed his push for the right to a jury trial, stating Representative government and trial by jury are the heart and lungs of liberty. Without them, we have no other fortification against being ridden like horses, fleeced like sheep, worked like cattle, and fed and clothed like swines and hounds. Elrod, Jennifer. Wither the Jury The Diminishing Role of the Jury Trial in Our Legal System, 68 WASH. LEE L. REV. 3, 8 . Adams did not generally like the other delegates to the Congress. He complained of what he considered to be their pretentiousness, writing to Abigail, I believe if it was moved and seconded that We should come to a Resolution that Three and two make five We should be entertained with Logick and Rhetorick, Law, History, Politicks and Mathematicks, concerning the Subject for two whole Days, and then We should pass the Resolution unanimously in the Affirmative. The Congress disbanded in October after sending a letter of grievances to King George III. The First Continental Congress, John Adams Historical Society, accessed 2016. The absence of Adams from home was hard on Abigail, who was left alone to care for the family. But she encouraged her husband in his task, writing You cannot be, I know, nor do I wish to see you an inactive Spectator, but if the Sword be drawn I bid adieu to all domestick felicity, and look forward to that Country where there is neither wars nor rumors of War in a firm belief that thro the mercy of its King we shall both rejoice there together. A month after the Battles of Lexington and Concord, Adams returned to Philadelphia for the Second Continental Congress as the leader of the Massachusetts delegation. He moved cautiously at first, observing that Congress was divided between Loyalist , those hesitant to take any position, and those favoring independence. He became convinced that Congress was moving in the proper direction away from its relationship with Great Britain. Publicly, Adams supported reconciliation if practicable, but privately agreed with Benjamin Franklins confidential observation that independence was inevitable. He opposed various attempts, including the Olive Branch Petition, aimed at trying to find peace between the colonies and Great Britain, writing, In my opinion Powder and Artillery are the most efficacious, Sure, and infallibly conciliatory Measures We can adopt. In June 1775, with a view of promoting union among the colonies, he nominated George Washington of Virginia as commanderinchief of the army then assembled around Boston. Ferling writes, By the fall of 1775 no one in Congress labored more ardently than Adams to hasten the day when America would be separate from Great Britain. In October 1775, Adams was appointed the chief judge of the Massachusetts Superior Court, but he never served, and resigned in February 1777. Thoughts on Government A number of delegates sought Adams advice about forming new governments.Ferling, ch. 9. Adams had privately criticized Thomas Paines 1776 pamphlet Common Sense , saying that the author had a better hand at pulling down than building. Yet, some delegates found his views so convincing they urged him to commit them to paper. He did so in separate letters to these colleagues, each missive a bit longer and more thoughtful. So impressed was Richard Henry Lee that, with Adamss consent, he had the most comprehensive letter printed. Published anonymously just after midApril 1776, it was titled simply Thoughts on Government and styled as a Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend. Many historians agree that none of Adams other compositions rivaled the enduring influence of this pamphlet. Adams advised that the form of government should be chosen to attain the desired ends the happiness and virtue of the greatest number of people. He wrote that, There is no good government but what is republican. That the only valuable part of the British constitution is so because the very definition of a republic is an empire of laws, and not of men. The treatise also defended bicameralism, for a single assembly is liable to all the vices, follies and frailties of an individual.Adams, Vol. IV, p. 195, Thoughts on Government He also suggested that there should be a separation of powers between the executive, the judicial and the legislative branches, and further recommended that if a continental government were to be formed then it should sacredly be confined to certain enumerated powers. Thoughts on Government was referenced as an authority in every stateconstitution writing hall.Ferling, ch. 12. Declaration of Independence Adams in the 1776 session of Congress drafted the preamble to the Lee resolution of colleague Richard Henry Lee , which called on the colonies to adopt new independent governments. On June 7, 1776 he seconded the resolution, which stated, These colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states. Adams also championed the measure until it was adopted by Congress on July 2. Once the resolution passed, independence became inevitable, though it still had to be declared formally. The commitment was, as Adams put it, independence itself.Ferling, ch. 8. Prior to independence being declared, a Committee of Five was charged with drafting the Declaration, and included Adams, along with Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Robert R. Livingston and Roger Sherman. The Committee, after discussing the general outline that the document should follow, decided that Jefferson would write the first draft. Jefferson particularly thought Adams should write the document but Adams persuaded the Committee to choose Jefferson while agreeing to consult with Jefferson personally. Adams recorded his exchange with Jefferson on the question Jefferson asked, Why will you not You ought to do it. To which Adams responded, I will not reasons enough. Jefferson replied, What can be your reasons And Adams responded, Reason first, you are a Virginian, and a Virginian ought to appear at the head of this business. Reason second, I am obnoxious, suspected, and unpopular. You are very much otherwise. Reason third, you can write ten times better than I can. Well, said Jefferson, if you are decided, I will do as well as I can. Adams concluded, Very well. When you have drawn it up, we will have a meeting. The Committee left no minutes, and the drafting process itself is uncertain accounts written many years later by Jefferson and Adams, although frequently cited, are otherwise contradictory. Although the first draft was written primarily by Jefferson, Adams assumed a primary role in its completion. After editing the document further, Congress approved it on July 4. Many years later Jefferson hailed Adams as the pillar of Declarations support on the floor of Congress, its ablest advocate and defender against the multifarious assaults it encountered.Jefferson, Thomas. To William P. Gardner. The Works of Thomas Jefferson . Federal Edition . Vol. 11. Government during revolution altBlack and white sketch of four men standing in a row beside a window After defeating the Continental Army at the Battle of Long Island on August 27, 1776, British Admiral Richard Howe mistakenly assumed a strategic advantage to be at hand, and requested the Second Continental Congress send representatives in an attempt to negotiate peace. A delegation, including Adams and Benjamin Franklin, met with Howe at the Staten Island Peace Conference on September 11. Howes authority was premised on the Colonists submission, so no common ground was to be found. When Lord Howe unhappily stated he could view the American delegates only as British subjects, Adams replied, Your lordship may consider me in what light you please, ...except that of a British subject. Adams learned many years later that his name was on a list of people specifically excluded from Howes pardongranting authority. Being quite unimpressed with General Howe, and also after payments to colonial volunteers were increased, Adams in September 1776 said about the war, We shall do well enough. Indeed, if Washington got his men, the British would be ruined. In 1777, Adams began serving as the head of the Board of War and Ordnance in fact, he sat on no less than ninety committees, chairing twentyfive. No other congressman approached the assumption of such a work load. As Benjamin Rush reported, he was acknowledged to be the first man in the House. He was also referred to as a one man war department, working eighteenhour days and mastering the details of raising, equipping and fielding an army under civilian control. He also authored the Plan of Treaties, laying out the Congresss requirements for the crucial treaty with France. Diplomat in Europe Commissioner to France and Minister Plenipotentiary In the spring of 1776 Adams advocated in Congress that independence was necessary in order to establish trade, and conversely trade was essential for the attainment of independence he specifically urged negotiation of a commercial treaty with France. He was then appointed, along with Franklin, Dickinson, Benjamin Harrison V of Virginia and Robert Morris of Pennsylvania, to prepare a plan of treaties to be proposed to foreign powers. Indeed, while Jefferson was laboring over the Declaration of Independence, Adams worked on the Model Treaty.Ferling, ch. 11. Adams joined Franklin and Arthur Lee in 1778 as a commissioner to France, replacing Silas Deane. He sailed for France with his 10yearold son John Quincy aboard the frigate Boston early that year. The stormy trip was treacherous, with lightning injuring 19 sailors and killing one. Adams ship was later pursued by several British frigates in the midAtlantic, but evaded them. Near the coast of Spain, Adams himself took up arms to help capture a heavily armed British merchantman ship, the Martha . Later, a cannon malfunction killed one and injured five more of the crew before the ship arrived in France. Adams did not speak French, the international language of diplomacy at the time. He therefore assumed a less visible role, but emerged as the commissions chief administrator, imposing order and methods lacking in his delegations finances and recordkeeping affairs. His first stay in Europe, between April 1, 1778, and June 17, 1779, was otherwise unremarkable, and he returned to his home in Braintree in early August 1779. Back home, Adams became one of the founders and charter members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1780. In 1779, after returning from France, Adams was also elected to the Massachusetts Constitutional Convention, to create a new constitution for Massachusetts. Once there, he served on a committee of three, also including Samuel Adams and James Bowdoin, to draft the constitution. The task of writing it fell primarily to John Adams. The resulting Constitution of Massachusetts was approved in 1780. It was the first constitution written by a special committee, then ratified by the people and was also the first to feature a bicameral legislature. Included were a distinct executive though restrained by an executive council with a partial veto, and a separate judicial branch. In the fall of 1779 Adams was unanimously appointed a Minister Plenipotentiary, charged with negotiating a treaty of peace, amity and commerce with peace commissioners from Britain. Following the conclusion of the Massachusetts constitutional convention, he departed for Europe in November aboard the French frigate Sensible accompanied by John Quincy and 9yearold son Charles. In France, constant disagreement between Lee and Franklin eventually resulted in Adams assuming the role of tiebreaker in almost all votes on commission business Adams also increased his usefulness by mastering the French language. In time Lee was recalled and Adams later developed his own enmity towards the older Franklin, whom the younger, more aggressive Adams felt was overly deferential to the French. The French foreign minister, the comte de Vergennes, disapproved of Adams, so Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, John Jay, and Henry Laurens were appointed to collaborate with Adams nevertheless, Jefferson did not go to Europe and Laurens was posted to the Dutch Republic. Jay, Adams, and Franklin played the major part in the final negotiations. Overruling Franklin and distrustful of Vergennes, Jay and Adams decided not to consult with France instead, they dealt directly with the British commissioners.Ferling, ch. 11 12. Throughout the negotiations, Adams successfully demanded that the right of the United States to the fisheries along the Atlantic coast be recognized. The American negotiators were able to secure a favorable treaty securing most lands east of the Mississippi, and the document was signed on September 3, 1783. Ambassador to Holland Medallion given to John Adams in 1782 by Johann Georg Holtzhey to mark United States as an independent nation by The Netherlands In July 1780 Adams replaced Laurens as the ambassador to the Dutch Republic, then one of the few other republics in the world. With the aid of the Dutch Patriot leader Joan van der Capellen tot den Pol, Adams secured the recognition of the United States as an independent government at The Hague on April 19, 1782. In February 1782 the Frisian states was the first Dutch province to recognize the United States, while France had been the first European country to grant diplomatic recognition in 1778. He also negotiated a loan of five million guilders financed by Nicolaas van Staphorst and Wilhelm Willink. By 1794 a total of eleven loans were granted in Amsterdam to the United States with a value of 29 million guilders. In October 1782, he negotiated with the Dutch a treaty of amity and commerce, the first such treaty between the United States and a foreign power following the 1778 treaty with France.Ferling, ch. 13. The house that Adams bought during this stay in The Netherlands became the first Americanowned embassy on foreign soil. In 1784 and 1785, he was one of the architects of extensive trade relations between the United States and Prussia. The Prussian ambassador in The Hague, Friedrich Wilhelm von Thulemeyer, was involved, as were Jefferson and Franklin, who were in Paris. Ambassador to Great Britain Adams was appointed in 1785 the first American minister to the Court of St Jamess . When a counterpart seemed to assume that Adams had some family members in England, Adams replied, Neither my father or mother, grandfather or grandmother, great grandfather or great grandmother, nor any other relation that I know of, or care a farthing for, has been in England these one hundred and fifty years so that you see I have not one drop of blood in my veins but what is American.Adams Adams, p. 392. Adams had his first audience with King George III on June 1, and recorded the event as he saw it in great detail in a letter to Foreign Minister John Jay on June 2. Adams approached the King, telling him that he felt greatly honored by his appointment, and promised to do all that he could to restore friendship and cordiality between People who, tho Seperated by an Ocean and under different Governments have the Same Language, a Similar Religion and kindred Blood. After hearing this, King George, promised to receive with Pleasure, the Assurances of the friendly Dispositions of the United States. He added that while he had been the last to consent to American independence, he wished Adams to know that he had always done what he thought right and proper. Towards the end of the interview, the King said, which to Adams appeared very sudden, There is an Opinion, among Some People, that you are not the most attached of all Your Countrymen, to the manners of France. Adams replied, That Opinion sir, is not mistaken, I must avow to your Majesty, I have no Attachments but to my own Country. To this King George responded, An honest Man will never have any other. During her visit to Washington to mark the bicentennial of American independence in 1976, Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom gave historical perspective to Adams service John Adams, Americas first ambassador, said to my ancestor, King George III, that it was his desire to help with the restoration of the old good nature and the old good humour between our peoples. That restoration has long been made, and the links of language, tradition, and personal contact have maintained it. Adams was joined by his wife while in London they suffered the stares and hostility of the Court, and chose to escape it when they could by seeking out Richard Price, minister of Newington Green Unitarian Church and instigator of the Revolution Controversy.Ferling, ch. 15. Conceptions of constitutional government Adams 1785 Mather Brown Portrait Adams preoccupation with political and governmental affairs which caused considerable separation from his wife and children ironically had a distinct familial context, which he articulated in 1780 I must study Politicks and War that my sons may have the liberty to study Mathematicks and Philosophy. My sons ought to study Geography, natural History, Naval Architecture, navigation, Commerce and Agriculture, in order to give their children a right to study Painting, Poetry, Musick, Architecutre, Statuary, Tapestry, and Porcelaine. While in London, Adams published a work entitled A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States . In it he repudiated the views of Turgot and other European writers as to the viciousness of state government frameworks. In the book, Adams suggested that the rich, the wellborn and the able should be set apart from other men in a senate that would prevent them from dominating the lower house. Adams Defence is described as an articulation of the classical republican theory of mixed government. Adams contended that social classes exist in every political society, and that a good government must accept that reality. For centuries, dating back to Aristotle, a mixed regime balancing monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy that is, the king, the nobles, and the people was required to preserve order and liberty. Wood has maintained that Adams political philosophy had become irrelevant by the time the Federal Constitution was ratified. By then, American political thought, transformed by more than a decade of vigorous debate as well as formative experiential pressures, had abandoned the classical perception of politics as a mirror of social estates. Americans new understanding of popular sovereignty was that the citizenry were the sole possessors of power in the nation. Representatives in the government enjoyed mere portions of the peoples power and only for a limited time. Adams was thought to have overlooked this evolution and revealed his continued attachment to the older version of politics. Yet Wood ignored Adams peculiar definition of the term republic, and his support for a constitution ratified by the people. He also underestimated Adams belief in checks and balances, such as Adams statement that, Power must be opposed to power, and interest to interest. This sentiment was later echoed by James Madisons famous statement that, ambition must be made to counteract ambition, in The Federalist No. 51, explaining the separation of powers established under the new Constitution.Works of John Adams, IV557 Adams was unsurpassed in his dedication to establishing checks and balances as a governing strategem. On the governments role in education Adams offered unambiguously that, The whole people must take upon themselves the education of the whole people and be willing to bear the expenses of it. There should not be a district of one mile square, without a school in it, not founded by a charitable individual, but maintained at the public expense of the people themselves.Adams, Letter to John Jebb, Vol. 9, p. 540. Vice Presidency, 1789 97 Tenure Each states presidential electors gathered in their states capital on February 4, 1789 to cast their votes for the president. As originally prescribed by Article II of the Constitution, each state chose a number of electors equal to its representation in Congress. Each elector then cast two votes for president, though the electors were not allowed to cast both votes for the same person, and were prohibited from casting both their ballots for persons from their own state. The individual who won the most electoral votes would become president while the individual with the secondmost electoral votes would become vice president. Each states votes were sealed and delivered to Congress to be counted. Adams received 34 electoral college votes in the presidential election of 1789, finishing in second place behind George Washington, who garnered 69 votes. As a result, Washington became the nations first president, and Adams became the its first vice president. altPartially bald man with white hair in black suit sits The first presidential term and the first vice presidential term both officially started on March 4, 1789, the date set by the Congress of the Confederation for the beginning of operations of the federal government under the new U.S. Constitution. However, due to a delay in the counting and certification of the electoral votes, which was not done until April 6 , they commenced several weeks late. Adams first presided over the Senate on April 21. Washington was inaugurated into office on April 30. Primarily established to provide a successor in the event of the presidents death, disability, or resignation, The vice presidents sole constitutionally prescribed responsibility is to preside over the U.S. Senate as its president. The vice president also has the authority to cast a tiebreaking vote. Adams played an active role in the Senates deliberations, particularly during his first term. On at least one occasion, he persuaded senators to vote against legislation he opposed, and he frequently lectured the body on procedural and policy matters. At the start of Washingtons presidency, Adams became deeply involved in a monthlong Senate controversy over the official titles for the president and executive officers of the new government. Although the House of Representatives agreed in short order that the president should be addressed simply as George Washington, President of the United States, the Senate debated the issue at some length. Adams favored the adoption of the style of Highness for the president. Others favored the variant of Electoral Highness or the lesser Excellency . Antifederalists in the Senate objected to the monarchical sound of them all Jefferson described them as superlatively ridiculous. In the end, Washington yielded to their objections and the House decided that the title of Mr. President would be used. He supported Washingtons policies by casting 29 tiebreaking votes. In doing so, he protected the presidents sole authority over the removal of appointees and influenced the location of the nations capital. But his views did not always align with Washington, who joined Franklin as the object of Adams ire, as shown in this quote The History of our Revolution will be one continued lie. . . . The essence of the whole will be that Dr. Franklins electrical Rod smote the Earth and out sprung General Washington. That Franklin electrified him with his Rod and henceforth these two conducted all the Policy, Negotiations, Legislatures and War. On at least one occasion, he persuaded senators to vote against legislation that he opposed, and he frequently lectured the Senate on procedural and policy matters. Adams political views and his attempt to assume a more active role in the Senate made him a natural target for critics of the Washington administration. Toward the end of his first term, as a result of a threatened resolution that would have silenced him except for procedural and policy matters, he began to exercise more restraint. When the nations first two opposing political parties formed, he joined the Federalist Party, though he was consistently in opposition to its dominant leader Alexander Hamilton. Beyond his role in the Senate, Adams played a minor role in the politics of the early 1790s. During his two vicepresidential terms, Adams attended few cabinet meetings, and the president sought his counsel only infrequently. Nonetheless, the two men, according to Ferling, jointly executed many more of the executive branchs ceremonial undertakings than would be likely for a contemporary president and vicepresident. Overall, while Adams brought energy and dedication to the office, he found the task not quite adapted to my character...too inactive, and mechanical. He often lamented what he viewed as the complete insignificance of his situation. To his wife Abigail he once wrote, My country has in its wisdom contrived for me the most insignificant office that ever the invention of man . . . or his imagination contrived or his imagination conceived and as I can do neither good nor evil, I must be borne away by others and met the common fate. Presidential election of 1796 1796 electoral vote totals Party Votes John Adams 71 Thomas Jefferson 68 Thomas Pinckney 59 Aaron Burr 30 Samuel Adams 15 Oliver Ellsworth 11 George Clinton 7 John Jay 5 James Iredell 3 John Henry 2 Samuel Johnston 2 George Washington 2 C. C. Pinckney 1 The election of 1796 was the first contested American presidential election. Twice, George Washington had been elected to office unanimously however, during his presidency, deep philosophical differences between the two leading figures in the administration Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson regarding domestic economic policy and U.S. foreign policy caused a rift between them, and led to the founding of the Federalist Party and the DemocraticRepublican Party. Thus, when Washington announced that he would not be a candidate for a third term, an intense partisan struggle for control of Congress and the presidency began. Like the previous two presidential elections, no candidates were put forward for voters to choose between in 1796. The Constitution provided for the selection of electors who would then elect a president. In seven states voters chose the presidential electors. In the remaining nine states, they were chosen by the states legislature. The clear favorite of Democratic Republicans was Jefferson, although he was very reluctant to run. There was little doubt that Adams would be the choice of a great majority of the Federalists. Even so, Hamilton also had hoped to lead the party.Diggins, pp. 83 88. The DemocraticRepublicans in Congress held a nominating caucus and named Jefferson and Aaron Burr as their presidential choices. Jefferson at first declined the nomination, but he finally agreed to run a few weeks later. Federalist members of Congress held an informal nominating caucus and named Adams and Thomas Pinckney as their candidates for president. The campaign, was, for the most part, unorganized and sporadic, confined to newspaper attacks, pamphlets and political ralliesof the four contenders, only Burr actively campaigned. Adams specifically stated that he wanted to stay out of what he called the silly and wicked game of campaigning for office.Ferling, ch. 16. As the campaign progressed, fears grew among Hamilton and his supporters that Adams was too vain, opinionated, unpredictable and stubborn to follow their directions once elected. Desiring a more pliant president than Adams, Hamilton maneuvered to tip the election to Pinckney. He coerced South Carolina Federalist electors, pledged to vote for favorite son Pinckney, to scatter their second votes among candidates other than Adams. Hamiltons scheme was undone, however, when several New England state electors heard of it, conferred, and agreed not to vote for Pinckney. Adams was nonetheless angered, writing shortly after the election that Hamilton was a proud Spirited, conceited, aspiring Mortal always pretending to Morality, with as debauched Morals as old Franklin who is more his Model than any one I know. In the end, Adams won the presidency by a narrow margin, receiving 71 electoral votes to 68 for Jefferson, who became the vice president Pinckney finished in third with 59 votes, and Burr came in fourth with 30. The balance of the Electoral College votes were dispersed among nine other candidates. This is the only election to date in which a president and vice president were elected from opposing tickets. Presidency, 1797 1801 Presidents House, Philadelphia. Adams occupied this Philadelphia mansion from March 1797 to May 1800. Adams was sworn into office as the nations second president on March 4, 1797, by Chief Justice Oliver Ellsworth. As president, he followed Washingtons lead in using the presidency to exemplify republican values and civic virtue and his service was free of scandal. He continued to strengthen the central government by expanding the Navy and Army. In July 1798 Adams signed into law the Act for the Relief of Sick and Disabled Seamen, which authorized the establishment of a governmentoperated marine hospital service. Historians debate his decision to retain en masse the members of Washingtons cabinet. Many felt he was oblivious to the political danger of such a decision, in light of the cabinets loyalty to Hamilton. The Hamiltonians who surround him, Jefferson soon remarked, you are only a little less hostile to him than to me. Although aware of the Hamilton factor, Adams was convinced their retention ensured a smoother succession. Adams economic programs maintained those of Hamilton, who indeed had regularly consulted with key cabinet members, especially the powerful Secretary of the Treasury, Oliver Wolcott Jr.Kurtz, ch. 12. Adams was in other respects quite independent of his cabinet, often making decisions despite strong opposition from it. Such selfreliance enabled him to avoid war with France, despite a strong desire among his cabinet secretaries for the conflict. The QuasiWar with France resulted in the detachment from European affairs that Washington had sought. It also had psychological benefits, allowing America to view itself as holding its own against a European power. Historian George Herring argues that Adams was the most independentminded of the founders. Though he aligned with the Federalists, he was somewhat a party unto himself, disagreeing with the Federalists as much as he did the DemocraticRepublicans. He was often described as prickly, but his tenacity was fed by good decisions made in the face of universal opposition. Adams was often combative, which diminished presidential decorum, as Adams himself admitted in his old age president I refused to suffer in silence. I sighed, sobbed, and groaned, and sometimes screeched and screamed. And I must confess to my shame and sorrow that I sometimes swore. Adams resolve to advance peace with France, rather than to continue hostilities, especially reduced his popularity. This played an important role in his reelection defeat, however he was so pleased with the outcome that he had it engraved on his tombstone. Adams spent much of his term at home in Massachusetts, ignoring the details of political patronage nursed by other office holders. QuasiWar and peace with France The presidents term was marked by disputes concerning the countrys role, if any, in the expanding conflict in Europe, where Britain and France were at war. Hamilton and the Federalists supported Britain, while Jefferson and the DemocraticRepublicans favored France. The French had supported Jefferson for president and became even more belligerent at his loss. When Adams entered office, he decided to continue Washingtons policy of staying out of the European war. The intense battle over the Jay Treaty in 1795 had previously polarized politics throughout the nation. The French saw America as Britains junior partner and began seizing American merchant ships that were trading with the British. Nevertheless, most Americans were initially proFrench due to Frances assistance during the Revolutionary War, and would not have sufficiently rallied behind anyone to stop France.Kurtz, ch. 13.Miller, ch. 12. On May 16, Adams gave a speech to the House and Senate in which he called for increasing defense capabilities in case of war with France. For this he was roundly derided in the Republican press. A political cartoon depicts the XYZ Affair America is a female being plundered by Frenchmen. Sentiments changed with the XYZ Affair. Adams appointed a threemember commission to represent the United States to negotiate with France. The commission consisted of John Marshall, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney and Elbridge Gerry. However, when the envoys arrived in October 1797, they were kept waiting for several days, and then granted only a 15minute meeting with French Foreign Minister Talleyrand. After this, the diplomats were met by three of Talleyrands agents. Each refused to conduct diplomatic negotiations unless the United States paid enormous bribes, one to Talleyrand personally, and another to the Republic of France. Supposedly this was to make up for offenses given to France by Adams in his speech. The Americans refused to negotiate on such terms. Marshall and Pinckney returned home, while Gerry remained. The affair substantially weakened popular American support of France. The proFrench Jeffersonians lost support and quickly became the minority as many began to demand fullscale war. The affair heightened fears of sedition by the administrations opponents and legislation was introduced in response. The president knew that America would be unable to win a conflict, as France at the time was dominating the fight in most of Europe. Adams therefore pursued a strategy whereby American ships harassed French ships in an effort sufficient to stem the French assaults on American interests. This was the undeclared naval war between the U.S. and France the QuasiWar which broke out in 1798. There was danger of invasion from the more powerful French forces, so Adams and the Federalist congress built up the army, bringing back Washington as its commander. Washington wanted Hamilton to be his secondincommand and Adams reluctantly accommodated. It became apparent that Hamilton was truly in charge due to Washingtons advanced years.Ferling, ch. 17. Adams also rebuilt the Navy, adding six fast, powerful frigates, most notably the USS Constitution . To pay for the military buildup, Congress imposed new taxes on property the Direct Tax of 1798.Miller, ch. 13. It was the first such federal tax. Taxpayers were angered, especially in southeast Pennsylvania, where the bloodless Friess Rebellion broke out among rural Germanspeaking farmers who protested what they saw as a threat to their republican liberties and to their churches.Elkins and McKitrick, pp. 696 700. Hamilton assumed control in the War department, and the rift between Adams and Hamiltons supporters widened. Many sought to vest Hamilton with command authority over the army, and they also resisted giving prominent DemocraticRepublicans positions in the army, which Adams wanted to do in order to gain bipartisan support. By building a large standing army, Hamiltons supporters raised popular alarms and played into the hands of the DemocraticRepublicans. They also alienated Adams and his large personal following. They shortsightedly viewed the Federalist party as their own tool and ignored the need to pull together the entire nation in the face of war with France. Overall, however, patriotic sentiments and a series of naval victories, popularized the war as well as the president. In February 1799, Adams surprised many by sending diplomat William Vans Murray on a peace mission to France. Napoleon, realizing that the conflict was pointless, signaled his readiness for friendly relations. At the Convention of 1800, the two sides agreed to return any captured ships and to allow for the peaceful transfer of nonmilitary goods to an enemy of the nation. The Treaty of Alliance of 1778 was superseded and the United States was then free of foreign entanglements, as Washington had advised in his farewell address. Adams brought in John Marshall as Secretary of State and demobilized the emergency army.Ferling, ch. 18. Adams proudly avoided war, but deeply split his party in the process. Alien and Sedition Acts Despite the discredit of the XYZ Affair, the Democratic Republicans opposition persisted. In the midst of war, which included the reign of terror during the French Revolution, political tensions were incendiary. Some proFrench DemocraticRepublicans even fostered a movement in America, similar to the French Revolution, to overthrow the Federalists. When DemocraticRepublicans in some states refused to enforce federal laws, some Federalists voiced the intention to send in an army and force them to capitulate. As the hostility sweeping Europe bled over into America, calls for secession began to reach new heights. Some Federalists accused the French and their associated immigrants of provoking civil unrest. In an attempt to quell the uprising, the Federalists introduced, and the Congress passed, a series of laws collectively referred to as the Alien and Sedition Acts, which were signed by Adams in 1798. Congress specifically passed four measures the Naturalization Act, the Alien Friends Act, the Alien Enemies Act and the Sedition Act. These statutes were designed to mitigate the threat of secessionists by disallowing their most extreme firebrands. The Naturalization Act increased to 14 years the period of residence required for an immigrant to attain American citizenship The Alien Friends Act and the Alien Enemies Act allowed the president to deport any foreigner which he considered dangerous to the country. The Sedition Act made it a crime to publish false, scandalous, and malicious writing against the government or its officials. Punishments included 2 5 years in prison and fines of up to 5,000. Although Adams had not promoted any of these acts, he signed them into law. The acts became controversial from prosecution thereunder of a Congressman and a number of newspaper editors. Indeed, the Federalist administration initiated fourteen or more indictments under the Sedition Act, as well as suits against five of the six most prominent Democratic Republican newspapers. The majority of the legal actions began in 1798 and 1799, and went to trial on the eve of the 1800 presidential election timing that hardly appeared coincidental, according to biographer Ferling. Other historians have cited evidence that the Alien and Sedition Acts were rarely enforced, namely 1 only 10 convictions under the Sedition Act have been identified 2 Adams never signed a deportation order and 3 the sources of expressed furor over the acts were Democratic Republicans. However, other historians have emphasized that the Acts were employed for political targeting from the outset, causing many aliens to leave the country. The Acts as well allowed for prosecution of many who opposed the Federalists, even on the floor of Congress. In any case, the election of 1800 in fact became a bitter and volatile contest, with each side expressing extraordinary fear of the other and its policies after Democratic Republicans prevailed in the elections of 1800, they used the acts against Federalists before the laws finally expired. Move to Washington Adams made his first official visit to the nations new seat of government in early June 1800. Amid the raw and unfinished cityscape, the president found the public buildings in a much greater forwardness of completion than expected. He moved into the nearly completed Presidents Mansion on November 1. Abigail arrived a few weeks later. Upon arriving, Adams wrote to her, Before I end my letter, I pray Heaven to bestow the best of Blessings on this House and all that shall hereafter inhabit it. May none but honest and wise Men ever rule under this roof. The Senate of the Sixth Congress met for the first time in the new Congress House on November 17, 1800. Several days later, on November 22, Adams delivered his fourth State of the Union Address to a joint session of Congress in the Senate chamber. This would be the last annual message any president would personally deliver to Congress for the next 113 years. Election of 1800 With the Federalist Party was deeply split over his negotiations with France, and the opposition Democratic Republicans enraged over the Alien and Sedition Acts, and the expansion of the military, Adams faced a daunting reelection campaign in 1800. As in 1796, the Federalist members of Congress caucused in the spring of 1800 and nominated Adams and Charles C. Pinckney. The Democratic Republicans meanwhile nominated Jefferson and Burr, their candidates in the previous election.Ferling, ch. 19. The campaign was bitter and characterized by malicious personal attacks. Federalists spread rumors that the Democratic Republicans were radicals who would ruin the country through revolution. They in turn accused Federalists of subverting republican principles through punitive federal laws, and of favoring Britain and the other coalition countries in their war with France in order to promote aristocratic, antirepublican values. Additionally, Hamilton was hard at work, attempting to sabotage the presidents reelection. In October, he published a pamphlet in which he charged that Adams was emotionally unstable, given to impulsive and irrational decisions, unable to coexist with his closest advisers, and generally unfit to be president. He also worked at persuading Federalist presidential electors in New England to withhold their vote from Adams, hoping to boosting Pinckneys chances of winning the presidency. 1800 electoral vote totals Party Votes Thomas Jefferson 73 Aaron Burr 73 John Adams 65 C. C. Pinckney 64 John Jay 1 When the electoral votes were counted, Adams finished in third place with 65 votes, and Pinckney came in fourth with 64 votes . Jefferson and Burr tied for first place with 73 votes each. Because of the tie, the election devolved upon the House of Representatives. As specified by the Constitution, each states delegation voted en bloc , with each state having a single vote an absolute majority was required for victory. On February 17, 1801 on the 36th ballot Jefferson was elected by a vote of 10 to 4 . Historian John E. Ferling attributes Adams defeat to five factors the stronger organization of the Democratic Republicans Federalist disunity the controversy surrounding the Alien and Sedition Acts the popularity of Jefferson in the south and, the effective politicking of Aaron Burr in New York, where the State Legislature shifted from Federalist to Democratic Republican on the basis of a few wards in New York City controlled by Burrs political machine. Analyzing the causes of the partys trouncing, Adams wrote, No party that ever existed knew itself so little or so vainly overrated its own influence and popularity as ours. None ever understood so ill the causes of its own power, or so wantonly destroyed them. To compound the agony of his defeat, Adams son Charles, a longtime alcoholic, died in late November. Anxious to rejoin Abigail, who had already left for Massachusetts, Adams departed the White House in the predawn hours of March 4, 1801, and did not attend Jeffersons inauguration. Since him, only three outgoing presidents have not attended their successors inauguration. The complications arising out of the 1796 and 1800 elections prompted Congress and the states to refine the process whereby the Electoral College elects a president and a vice president. The new procedure was enacted through the 12th Amendment, which became a part of the Constitution in June 1804, and was first followed in that years presidential election. Cabinet Judicial appointments John Marshall, 4th Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court Adams appointed two U.S. Supreme Court associate justices during his term in office Bushrod Washington, the nephew of American founding father and President George Washington, to succeed James Wilson and Alfred Moore, who succeeded James Iredell. He also named John Marshall as the fourth Chief Justice of the United States, replacing Oliver Ellsworth, who had retired due to ill health. Marshalls long tenure represents the most lasting influence of the Federalists, as he infused the Constitution with a judicious and carefully reasoned nationalistic interpretation and established the Judicial Branch as the equal of the Executive and Legislative branches. After the Federalists lost control of both houses of Congress along with the White House in the election of 1800, the lameduck session of the 6th Congress in February 1801 approved a judiciary act, commonly known as the Midnight Judges Act, which created a set of federal appeals courts between the district courts and the Supreme Court. Adams filled the vacancies created in this statute by appointing a series of judges, whom his opponents called the Midnight Judges the appointments were issued just days before his presidential term expired. Most of these judges lost their posts when the 7th Congress, with a solid DemocraticRepublican majority, approved the Judiciary Act of 1802, abolishing the newly created courts.Ferling, ch. 19, Retirement altAn unsmiling elderly man sits in a red chair, slightly pointing left. Adams resumed farming at his home Peacefield in the town of Quincy he also began work on an autobiography and resumed correspondence with such old friends as Benjamin Waterhouse and Benjamin Rush.Ferling, ch. 20. Aside from this, Adams generally stayed quiet. He did not publicly criticize Jeffersons actions as president, believing that instead of opposing Systematically any Administration, running down their Characters and opposing all their Measures right or wrong, We ought to Support every Administration as far as We can in Justice. He did, however, privately attack the president over his Embargo Act, despite the fact that it was voted for by his son John Quincy, a U.S. senator. Another incident began in relation to Mercy Otis Warren in 1806. Warren, an old friend, had attacked Adams in a pamphlet for his partiality for monarchy and pride of talents and much ambition. A tempestuous correspondence ensued. In time, the friendship healed. After Jeffersons retirement from public life in 1809, Adams became more vocal. He published a threeyear marathon of letters in the Boston Patriot newspaper, refuting linebyline an 1800 pamphlet by Hamilton which attacked his conduct and character. Though Hamilton had died in 1804 in a duel with Aaron Burr, Adams felt the need to vindicate his character against the New Yorkers vehement charges. The years of retirement in the Adams household were not without some temporary financial adversity in 1803 the bank holding his cash reserves of about 13,000 collapsed. John Quincy came to the rescue by purchasing from him his properties in Weymouth and Quincy, including Peacefield, for the sum of 12,800. Daughter Abigail was married to Representative William Stephens Smith, but she returned to her parents home after the failure of the marriage she died of breast cancer in 1813. His wife Abigail died of typhoid on October 28, 1818. His son Thomas and wife Ann, along with seven children, lived with Adams to the end of Adams life, as well as Louisa Smith . Sixteen months before John Adams death, John Quincy became the sixth president of the United States in 1825, the only son to succeed his father as President until George W. Bush in 2001. Correspondence with Jefferson In early 1801, Adams had sent Thomas Jefferson a brief note after returning to Quincy to which Jefferson did not respond. In 1804, Abigail wrote to Jefferson to express her condolences upon the death of his daughter Polly, who had stayed with the Adamses is London in 1787. This initiated a brief correspondence which quickly descended into political rancor. Jefferson terminated it by not replying to Abigails fourth letter. Aside from that, there had been no communication between Peacefield and Monticello since Adams left office. In early 1812, Adams reconciled with Jefferson. Their mutual friend Benjamin Rush, a fellow signer of the Declaration of Independence who had been corresponding with both, encouraged them to reach out to each other. On New Years Day Adams sent a brief, friendly note to Jefferson to accompany the delivery of two pieces of homespun, a twovolume collection of lectures on rhetoric by John Quincy Adams. Jefferson replied immediately with a cordial letter, and the two men revived their friendship, which they sustained by mail. The correspondence that they resumed in 1812 lasted the rest of their lives, and has been hailed as among their great legacies of American literature. Their letters represent an insight into both the period and the minds of the two revolutionary leaders and presidents. The missives lasted fourteen years, and consisted of 158 letters 109 from Adams and 49 from Jefferson. Early on, Adams repeatedly tried to turn the correspondence to a discussion of their actions in the political arena. Jefferson refused to oblige him, saying that nothing new can be added by you or me to what has been said by others and will be said in every age.Thomas Jefferson to John Adams, June 27, 1813. Cappon p. 338. Adams made one more attempt, writing that You and I ought not to die before we have explained ourselves to each other.John Adams to Thomas Jefferson, July 15, 1813. Cappon p. 358. Still, Jefferson declined to engage Adams in this sort of discussion. Adams accepted this, and the correspondence turned to other matters. The two men discussed natural aristocracy. Jefferson said, The natural aristocracy I consider as the most precious gift of nature for the instruction, the trusts, and government of society. And indeed it would have been inconsistent in creation to have formed man for the social state, and not to have provided virtue and wisdom enough to manage the concerns of society. May we not even say that the form of government is best which provides most effectually for a pure selection of these natural aristocrats into the offices of governmentThomas Jefferson to John Adams, October 28, 1813. Cappon, p. 388. Adams wondered if it ever would be so clear who these people were, Your distinction between natural and artificial aristocracy does not appear to me well founded. Birth and wealth are conferred on some men as imperiously by nature, as genius, strength, or beauty. ... When aristocracies are established by human laws and honour, wealth, and power are made hereditary by municipal laws and political institutions, then I acknowledge artificial aristocracy to commence. It would always be true, Adams argued, that fate would bestow influence on some men for reasons other than true wisdom and virtue. That being the way of nature, he thought such talents were natural. A good government, therefore, had to account for that reality.John Adams to Thomas Jefferson, November 15, 1813. Cappon, p. 400. As the two grew older, the letters became fewer and farther between. There was also a great deal that they kept to themselves. Jefferson said nothing about his construction of a new house, domestic turmoil, slave ownership, or poor financial situation, while Adams did not mention the troublesome behavior of his son Thomas, who had failed as a lawyer and become an alcoholic, resorting afterwards to living primarily as a caretaker at Peacefield. Death alt3 marble sarcophagi, one in the foreground, 2 in the background are seen. 2 are seen with flags of the United States at the top. Less than a month before his death, Adams issued a statement about the destiny of the United States, which historians such as Joy Hakim have characterized as a warning for his fellow citizens My best wishes, in the joys, and festivities, and the solemn services of that day on which will be completed the fiftieth year from its birth, of the independence of the United States a memorable epoch in the annals of the human race, destined in future history to form the brightest or the blackest page, according to the use or the abuse of those political institutions by which they shall, in time to come, be shaped by the human mind. On July 4, 1826, the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, Adams died at his home in Quincy, at approximately 620 PM. Adams crypt lies at United First Parish Church in Quincy, Massachusetts, with his wife Abigail and son John Quincy Adams. When Adams died, his last words included an acknowledgement of his longtime friend and rival Thomas Jefferson survives. Adams was, in fact, unaware that Jefferson had died several hours before. Political philosophy and views Slavery Adams never bought a slave and declined on principle to utilize slave labor, saying, I have, through my whole life, held the practice of slavery in such abhorrence, that I have never owned a negro or any other slave, though I have lived for many years in times, when the practice was not disgraceful, when the best men in my vicinity thought it not inconsistent with their character, and when it has cost me thousands of dollars for the labor and subsistence of free men, which I might have saved by the purchase of negroes at times when they were very cheap. Adams generally tried to keep the issue out of national politics, because of the anticipated southern response during a time when unity was needed to achieve independence. He spoke out in 1777 against a bill to emancipate slaves in Massachusetts, saying that the issue was presently too divisive, and so the legislation should sleep for a time. He also was against use of black soldiers in the Revolution, due to opposition from southerners. Slavery was abolished in Massachusetts about 1780, when it was forbidden by implication in the Declaration of Rights that John Adams wrote into the Massachusetts Constitution. Abigail Adams, on the other hand, vocally opposed slavery. Accusations of monarchism Throughout his lifetime Adams expressed controversial and shifting views regarding the virtues of monarchical and hereditary political institutions. At times he conveyed substantial support for these approaches, suggesting for example that hereditary monarchy or aristocracy are the only institutions that can possibly preserve the laws and liberties of the people. Yet at other times he distanced himself from such ideas, calling himself a mortal and irreconcilable enemy to Monarchy and no friend to hereditary limited monarchy in America. Such denials did not assuage his critics, and Adams was often accused of being a monarchist. altAn elderly man sits in a red chair with his arms crossed, looking slightly left. Many of these attacks are considered to have been scurrilous, including suggestions that he was planning to crown himself king and grooming John Quincy as heir to the throne. However, Peter Shaw has argued that The inevitable attacks on Adams, crude as they were, stumbled on a truth that he did not admit to himself. He was leaning toward monarchy and aristocracy at the time he wrote Davila, though he did not directly reveal this in its essays. Decidedly, sometime after he became vicepresident, Adams concluded that the United States would have to adopt a hereditary legislature and a monarch... and he outlined a plan by which state conventions would appoint hereditary senators while a national one appointed a president for life. In contradiction to such notions, Adams asserted in a letter to Thomas Jefferson If you suppose that I have ever had a design or desire of attempting to introduce a government of King, Lords and Commons, or in other words an hereditary Executive, or an hereditary Senate, either into the government of the United States, or that of any individual state, in this country, you are wholly mistaken. There is not such a thought expressed or intimated in any public writing or private letter of mine, and I may safely challenge all of mankind to produce such a passage and quote the chapter and verse. Religious views Adams was raised a Congregationalist, since his ancestors were Puritans. According to biographer David McCullough, as his family and friends knew, Adams was both a devout Christian, and an independent thinker. In a letter to Benjamin Rush, Adams credited religion with the success of his ancestors since their migration to the New World in the 1630s. Adams was educated at Harvard when the influence of deism was growing there, and sometimes used deistic terms in his speeches and writing.Ferling, ch. 20. He also believed that regular church service was beneficial to mans moral sense. Everett concludes that Adams strove for a religion based on a common sense sort of reasonableness and maintained that religion must change and evolve toward perfection. Fielding argues that Adams beliefs synthesized Puritan, deist, and humanist concepts. Adams at one point said that Christianity had originally been revelatory, but was being misinterpreted and misused in the service of superstition, fraud, and unscrupulous power. Goff acknowledges Fieldings persuasive argument that Adams never was a deist because he allowed the suspension of the laws of nature and believed that evil was internal, not the result of external institutions.Goff, Philip Kevin. . The Religious World of the Revolutionary John Adams . PhD desertation. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. p. 382. Frazer notes that while Adams shared many perspectives with deists, Adams clearly was not a deist. Deism rejected any and all supernatural activity and intervention by God consequently, deists did not believe in miracles or Gods providence....Adams, however, did believe in miracles, providence, and, to a certain extent, the Bible as revelation.Frazer, Gregg L. . The Political Theology of the American Founding . PhD dissertation. Claremont Graduate University. p. 46. Frazer further argues that Adams theistic rationalism, like that of the other Founders, was a sort of middle ground between Protestantism and deism.Frazer, Gregg L. . The Political Theology of the American Founding . PhD dissertation. Claremont Graduate University. p. 50. By contrast, David L. Holmes has argued that Adams, beginning as a Congregationalist, ended his days as a Christian Unitarian, accepting central tenets of the Unitarian creed, but also accepting Jesus as the redeemer of humanity and the biblical account of his miracles as true. Like many of his Protestant contemporaries, Adams criticized the claims to universal authority made by the Catholic Church. In 1796, Adams denounced political opponent Thomas Paines deistic criticisms of Christianity in The Age of Reason , saying, The Christian religion is, above all the religions that ever prevailed or existed in ancient or modern times, the religion of wisdom, virtue, equity and humanity, let the Blackguard Paine say what he will.Adams, Vol. III, p. 421, diary entry for July 26, 1796. Legacy Historical reputation Adams has left behind a mixed legacy. Most historians applaud him for avoiding an allout war with France during his presidency. His signing of the Alien and Sedition Acts is almost always condemned. Adams is generally less well known than many of Americas other founding fathers. McCullough argued that the problem with Adams is that most Americans know nothing about him. Todd Leopold of CNN added in 2001 that Adams is remembered as that guy who served a single term as president between Washington and Jefferson, and as a short, vain, somewhat rotund man whose stature seems to have been dwarfed by his lanky colleagues. He has always been seen, Ferling says, as honest and dedicated, but despite his lengthy career in public service, is still overshadowed by the dramatic explanations and strong personalities of his contemporaries. Gilbert Chinard, in his 1933 biography of Adams, described the man as staunch, honest stubborn and somewhat narrow. In his 1962 biography, Page Smith lauds Adams for his fight against radicals such as Thomas Paine, whose promised reforms portended anarchy and misery. In 1995, Peter Shaw published The Character of John Adams. Ferling says that the man who emerges is one perpetually at war with himself, whose desire for fame and recognition leads to changes of vanity. Ferling, in his 1992 biography, writes that Adams was his own worst enemy. He criticizes Adams for his pettiness...jealousy, and vanity, and finds fault with him for his frequent separations from his wife and children. However, he praises Adams for his willingness to acknowledge his deficiencies and for striving to overcome them. Biographies Adams grandson Charles Francis Adams Sr. edited the first two volumes of The Works of John Adams, Esq., Second President of the United States . These were published between 1850 and 1856 by Charles C. Little and James Brown in Boston. The first seven chapters were produced by John Quincy Adams.Ferling, Select Bibliography. The premier modern biography was Honest John Adams , a 1933 biography by the noted French specialist in American history Gilbert Chinard, who came to Adams after writing his acclaimed 1929 biography of Jefferson. For a generation, Chinards work was regarded as the best life of Adams, and it is still an important text in illustrating the themes of Adams biographical and historical scholarship. Following the opening of the Adams family papers in the 1950s, Page Smith published the first major biography to use these previously inaccessible primary sources his biography won a 1962 Bancroft Prize but was criticized for its scanting of Adams intellectual life and its diffuseness. In 1975, Peter Shaw published The Character of John Adams, a thematic biography noted for its psychological insight into Adams life. The 1992 character study by Joseph J. Ellis, Passionate Sage The Character and Legacy of John Adams, was Elliss first major publishing success and remains one of the most useful and insightful studies of Adams personality. In 1992, the Revolutionary War historian and biographer John E. Ferling published his acclaimed John Adams A Life , also noted for its psychological sensitivity. David McCullough authored the 2001 biography John Adams , which won various awards and was the basis for a 2008 TV miniseries. In memoriam Adams is commemorated as the namesake of various counties, buildings, and other items. See also John Adams Building of the Library of Congress Suffolk County Courthouse, also known as the John Adams Courthouse Notes Bibliography Biographies Specialized studies Primary sources Butterfield, L. H. et al., eds., The Adams Papers . Multivolume letterpress edition of all letters to and from major members of the Adams family, plus their diaries still incomplete. Founders Online searchable edition Butterfield, L. H., ed. Adams Family Correspondence. Cambridge Harvard University Press Carey, George W., ed. The Political Writings of John Adams . John A. Schutz and Douglass Adair, eds. Spur of Fame, The Dialogues of John Adams and Benjamin Rush, 1805 1813 C. Bradley Thompson, ed. Revolutionary Writings of John Adams, Adams, John, Novanglus or, A History of the Dispute with America . Hogan, Margaret and C. James Taylor, eds. My Dearest Friend Letters of Abigail and John Adams. Cambridge Harvard University Press, 2007. Richardson, James D. ed. A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents , reprints his major messages and reports. Taylor, Robert J. et al., eds. Papers of John Adams. Cambridge Harvard University Press Wroth, L. Kinvin and Hiller B. Zobel, eds. The Legal Papers of John Adams. Cambridge Harvard University Press Further reading Akers, Charles W. John Adams in Henry Graff, ed. The Presidents A Reference History online Brinkley, Alan, and Davis Dyer, eds. The American Presidency . Boston Houghton Mifflin company, Brown, Ralph A. , The Presidency of John Adams. Freeman, Joanne B. Affairs of Honor National Politics in the New Republic. Grant, James. John Adams Party of One. Haraszti, Zoltan. , John Adams and the Prophets of Progress . Incisive analysis of John Adams political comments on numerous authors through examining his marginalia in his copies of their books. Howe, John R., Jr. , The Changing Political Thought of John Adams Knollenberg, Bernard. , Growth of the American Revolution 1766 1775, Ryerson, Richard Alan, ed. , John Adams and the Founding of the Republic Ryerson, Richard Alan. John Adamss Republic The One, the Few, and the Many 555 pp Sharp, James Roger. American Politics in the Early Republic The New Nation in Crisis. politics of 1790s Waldstreicher, David, ed. 2013, A Companion to John Adams and John Quincy Adams White, Leonard D. , The Federalists A Study in Administrative History External links White House biography William Everdell, From State to FreeState The Meaning of the Word Republic from Jean Bodin to John Adams By William R. Everdell John Adams A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress Letter from John Quincy Adams describing his father John Adams decline toward the end of the latters life Shapell Manuscript Foundation The John Adams Library at the Boston Public Library Adams Family Papers An Electronic Archive at the Massachusetts Historical Society The Adams Papers, subset of Founders Online from the National Archives American President John Adams at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia John Adams Papers at the Avalon Project Thoughts on Government Adams, April 1776 at the Constitution Society John Adams at The American Revolution website Life Portrait of John Adams, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , March 22, 1999 Category1735 births Category1826 deaths Category18thcentury American politicians Category18thcentury American writers Category18thcentury Congregationalists Category18thcentury Unitarians Category19thcentury American politicians Category19thcentury Unitarians CategoryAdams political family CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to Great Britain CategoryAmbassadors of the United States to the Netherlands CategoryAmerican Congregationalists CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of Welsh descent CategoryAmerican tax resisters CategoryAmerican Unitarians CategoryBurials in Massachusetts CategoryContinental Congressmen from Massachusetts CategoryFathers of Presidents of the United States CategoryFellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences CategoryHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees CategoryHarvard University alumni CategoryHistory of the United States CategoryMassachusetts Federalists CategoryMembers of the American Antiquarian Society CategoryMembers of the American Philosophical Society CategoryMembers of the Massachusetts House of Representatives CategoryPeople of Massachusetts in the American Revolution CategoryPeople of the QuasiWar CategoryPoliticians from Braintree, Massachusetts CategoryPoliticians from Quincy, Massachusetts CategoryPresidents of the United States CategorySigners of the United States Declaration of Independence CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1789 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1792 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1796 CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1800 CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryWashington administration cabinet members CategoryAmerican expatriates in the Dutch Republic CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by readinglaw
The following is an archived discussion of a featured article nomination. Please do not modify it. Subsequent comments should be made on the articles talk page or in Wikipedia talkFeatured article candidates. No further edits should be made to this page. The article was promoted 1813, 25 August 2007. Ronald Reagan previous FAC I know Ive said this before, but Ronald Reagan is finally ready to be a featured article. It meets the FA criteria, complies with the manual of style, is neutral, stable, and claims are verifiable. Citations are provided throughout. The recently remodeled Reaganomics and the economy section is much more engaging and neutral, plus shorter. This article does a great job presenting the life of Americas 40th President, and it is ready. Best, Happyme22 0659, 16 August 2007 Comment At 106 kilobytes long, there are still concerns about the WPLENGTH. Some browsers or internet connections may struggle to load this page. Also, it may help to split off some of the information into separate articles. fIanMacMf 0801, 16 August 2007 Comment WPLENGTH is concerned with readable prose, not overall length, and suggests Readers may tire of reading a page much longer than about 6,000 to 10,000 words, which roughly corresponds to 30 to 50 KB of readable prose. The Ronald Reagan article is currently about 9,000 words and 55K of readable prose. While this is at the upper end, it complies with the recommended length guidelines.Paul 1458, 16 August 2007 All the US president articles will be understandably at the upper end of length recommendations.Sumoeagle179 1543, 16 August 2007 You dont know how hard Ive tried to lower the kb count on this article. Ill keep trying, but I dont know if its going to get much lower. Also, Gerald Ford, a featured article and a U.S. President, is 110 kb long . Happyme22 1836, 16 August 2007 There are at least six FAs that I know of that have between 60 and 85KB of prose, surpassing WPSIZE guidelines. No double standards here at least Reagan is within guidelines. SandyGeorgia 1849, 16 August 2007 The current prose size is 49KB according to Dr pdas script completely within WPSIZE guidelines. SandyGeorgia 1800, 16 August 2007 Comment I agree that articles about US Presidents are likely to be longer than the average Wikipedia article. For the record, my computer loaded the page in about 12 seconds including images. The article will be seen at its best with a modern browser and broadband connection. fIanMacMf 1604, 18 August 2007 Support cheers, Casliber 0243, 17 August 2007 Thank You so much Happyme22 1528, 17 August 2007 Support . I have watched Happyme22s work on this article, including five FACs, since March 2007 I believe it now deserves featured status. Ive edited today to remove overlinking, complete refs, do some minor ce and WPDASH, WPHYPHEN and WPMOSNUM fixes, correct some extreme oversized images per WPMOSImages, replace some nonreliable sources and add some missing citations . I added three cite tags, which I expect will be attended to before this FAC closes if citations cant be provided, those three statements could be removed. Disclaimer I figure as a top editor of the article, but almost all of my contributions have been ongoing ref and MOS cleanups during the FACs Ive contributed no text, and only a few minor copyedits. When I work on refs, I work by section, and it chunks up a high edit count. On his first appearance at FAC, I doubted that Happyme22 could complete this job, but she has persevered and done a fine job over many months. I am particularly impressed by the tight focus and effective use of summary style, and adamantly disagree that length is an issue here. SandyGeorgia 0448, 17 August 2007 Thank You so much Sandy. You have helped this article to be great, and were so close Happyme22 1528, 17 August 2007 Support Rlevse 1005, 17 August 2007 Thank You. Happyme22 1528, 17 August 2007 Support I think the progress this article has made is outstanding, and it is fully deserving of FA status. JCO312 1729, 17 August 2007 Thanks again for all your help with the Reaganomics section Happyme22 1822, 17 August 2007 Strong Oppose This article still reads in a lot of places like its either POV or its exaggerating his status in American history. CJ Marsicano 1928, 17 August 2007 Forgive me, but thats too vague to be an even barely constructive comment. You would help the editors working on the article by giving a few examples. Also you may like to provide an assessment of where he does fit in American history and how the article deviates from that. Thanks. Mark83 1942, 17 August 2007 I agree. Its not a legitimate reason to oppose the article without an example. Happyme22 1943, 17 August 2007 No examples Reagans status in American history is established by reliable sources. SandyGeorgia 2033, 17 August 2007 Hapyme22, you thanked someone below for simply writing, Support. I agree it would be helpful to have specific examples of POV , but sometimes what people give is a general impression of the article. Thank you Cjmarsicano for contributing to this discussion. Wikipediatoperfection 2351, 19 August 2007 Yes, I thanked someone for supporting the article that I nominated. Happyme22 2359, 19 August 2007 Weak oppose . Towards the end of the article, there is too much WPPROSELINE. I dont like reading an article where every paragraph starts with In 1987On January 6, 2003etcWafulz 1950, 17 August 2007 Thank You. Does it look better now Would you consider supporting Happyme22 1958, 17 August 2007 I dont have time to read through the full article, but Ill strike my opposition.Wafulz 2150, 17 August 2007 Support Great work, its one of the most informative articles on wikipedia, it shows perfect NPOV and is well written. Southern Texas 2212, 17 August 2007 Thanks a lot Happyme22 0246, 18 August 2007 Oppose . The economics section still has remnants of the problematic sentence I criticized last time around and some of the same problems are still there. Quote Critics of Reagans economic polices dubbed them Trickledown economics,65 due to the large budget deficits spawned,66 and the U.S. trade deficit expansion.66 Unquote. The causal relationship is still wrong. Critics did indeed use the term trickledown economics but not because of the deficits but because of how the theory was supposed to work. Tax cuts that directly benefitted mostly the well off were supposed to have beneficial effects that trickled down to those less well off. Critics did criticize the deficits but the nickname didnt come about because of them. Additionally the section is now too short in relation with the rest of the article. It should be lengthened again while some of the later sections could be shortened. The DeathLegacyPopular opinionHonors sections take up disproportionate space with sentences like The Illinois State Toll Highway Authority voted to rename Interstate 88, which was formerly called the EastWest Tollway, in his memory, before being awarded three posthumous honors in 2005. Including information like this is much less important than covering Reagans economic policies, theories and governance. Id recommend reinstating the Regan quote, for example. Haukur 2235, 17 August 2007 The specific issues I complained about have been largely addressed. I still wouldnt say the economics section is good or well written but there arent any real howlers now. Haukur 2050, 18 August 2007 If you dislike one sentence, why not fix it SandyGeorgia 2254, 17 August 2007 What is the sound of one editor building consensus If I knew of a great sentence to use instead I would make a change. On the other hand I also think FAC reviewers that stay out of actual editing can, perhaps, give a more neutral perspective. Haukur 2302, 17 August 2007 Well, you seem to know how you want the sentence fixed, so I thought youd give it a whirl. SandyGeorgia 2306, 17 August 2007 Im not at all sure what I want the sentence to say. I do want coverage of trickledown and I do want coverage of the deficits and I dont want errors but beyond that I havent got any ideas. Why dont you give it a try since you seem to know what I want it to say Haukur 2312, 17 August 2007 I have seen UserLing.Nut and UserSandyGeorgia working very hard on the Reaganomics and the economy section, and it seems now to imply really what trickle down economics means. Happyme22 1705, 18 August 2007 Support . NPOV, well written and well sourced. RandomOrca2 0213, 18 August 2007 Thanks Happyme22 0246, 18 August 2007 Comment . This article reads much better than it used to. My main concern is the general lack of scholarly sources, on a topic that academics have devoted a huge amount of time studying. Though a number of respectable scholarly and semipopular sources are listed in the References, for most it is not clear to what extent they were used in writing the article, as they do not appear in any footnotes. The biographies by popular writers , meanwhile, appear frequently in the footnotes. Im not intimately familiar with Reagan historiography, so I can only give a few pointers on further scholarly sources. In particular, the book The Reagan Presidency , is an important one in terms of historical assessment of his presidency. I also expect that Diggins book is a fairly rigorous source, as he is an eminent historian. Whether or not these source issues warrant withholding FA status... that depends on how much the definition of reliable sources varies with spectrum of sources available for a particular topic. My own view is that an FA should use not just reliable sources, but the best sources available this article doesnt do that.ragesoss 0307, 18 August 2007 Comment Ive been staring at the article, and in particular its section about Reaganomics and the economy , for some time now. It needs help from people who understand economics, that much is absolutely certain. I only have an MA in Econ., and that was from too many decades ago for me to feel really confident about myself, but some of the mistakes in the section were fairly obvious. Some result from oversimplification which has been extended to the point where the facts are just wrong some from trying to connect thoughts into summary sentences in a manner which creates flawed connections... Ill try to fix them. I still havent fixed the connection drawn between Reagan and Black Monday market crash the stark wording makes that conclusion seem far more cutanddried than is tenable. In general, I agree with everything Haukur has to say about this article, though I have hope that it can be fixed quickly. I mgiht suggest getting help from WikiProjects related to economics but on the other hand, that could be harmful, as it might draw out the POVheads with their neverending arguments... I dunno. I dont know anyone reliable in those projects because I have had no contact with them... Ling.Nut 0744, 18 August 2007 I have seen UserLing.Nut and UserSandyGeorgia working very hard on the Reaganomics and the economy section, and it seems now to imply really what trickle down economics means. I think the section looks a lot better and more neutral now also. Happyme22 1705, 18 August 2007 Comment The article says Reagan was posthumously awarded with the Order of the White Eagle, but it doesnt say what good he did for Poland. I suppose the Cold War section should mention his support for Solidarity, opposition to Jaruzelskis martial law and close coperation with Pope John Paul II , all of which was crucial for the eventual fall of Communism in Europe. Kpalion 0926, 18 August 2007 Thats a good point. I added a setence on Reagan and Poland, and the Pope, in the Honors section, because it would be too difficult to add it in the Cold War section. Happyme22 1720, 18 August 2007 Support . I think this is one of the best articles Ive ever seen on Wikipedia. Very thorough Excellent Job Mike Searson 1326, 18 August 2007 Thanks a lot Happyme22 Comment Once again agreeing with Haukur, every US President gets boxes of awards. Can we delete the high schools and other trivia There is less than one sentence about his focus on rebuilding the military... I think that there are a few instances of this kind of misplaced emphasis in the article... Ling.Nut 1354, 18 August 2007 Well, ok, but not everything in the honors section has to go... Happyme22 1641, 18 August 2007 Support excellent article, meets all the criteria. Truly deserving of FA status. Well done. Johntex talk 1531, 18 August 2007 Thanks Happyme22 1641, 18 August 2007 Image issues . ImageReagan Boraxo.jpg is said to be in the public domain because it is a work of the United States Federal Government but it seems unlikely that the Federal Government was advertising a brand of laundry detergent. Additionally, many of the images come from the Reagan Library Archives with a note that the RLA says that all its images are in the public domain. They did, indeed, say that a couple of years backbut they have since conspiculously removed the statement which suggests that theyve found out that it wasnt true. This may still be good enough for us, I just wanted to make a note of it and say that maybe the image description pages should be updated with a note and an Internet Archive link. Haukur 1559, 18 August 2007 Well let me quote from the Reagan Librarys image page ...The over 600 selected images represented here are only a small portion of the over 1.5 million photographs available. Please credit Courtesy Ronald Reagan Library. Wouldnt they have said that they couldnt be used commercially if they didnt want them on Wiki Happyme22 1641, 18 August 2007 Im sure theyre happy for us to use the images. That doesnt mean they are all in the public domain or that the RL holds the rights to those that arent. Haukur 2050, 18 August 2007 Comment on reference format Hey, I know Wikipedia is flexible on referencing formats, in order to accommodate the large number of differences between the styles used within different academic fields... but... this one has full references formatted as both footnotes and within a reference section. I thought that if you used both sections, the footnotes were strictly for two things authorpage no. , and additional comments e.g. Historians disagree on whether or not Reagan wore a wig, with the consensus being that he simply dyed his hair. But full refs are in both sections some refs are in the footnotestyle section that are not included in the following section. Is that permissible Sandy Ling.Nut 1616, 18 August 2007 Ive always disagreed with the nonsense about repeating all sources in both notes and refs theres already a size issue here. Imagine what will happen to the load time if every note is also repeated in refs, just to comply with a nonsensical rule that sometimes says we should do that. I hate the articles that do that, even more so when Im forced to use a dialup. Why everything should be listed twice escapes my peabrain, I guess. The way the refs are presented here, IMO, is the most logical considering article size and load time. If the rules say otherwise, IAR. SandyGeorgia 1630, 18 August 2007 One editors nonsense is another editors golden logic. But if youre OK with it, then Im OKish with it. Ive made some additions to the econ section so the errors arent so please do forgive me if I am being too blunt painfully obvious. Really, the dedicated editors of this article should have made friends with some econ people a long time ago The additions Ive made dont really seem to flow perfectly, please forgive me... but... I may add one or two more little things, but then may have to beg off due to real life responsibilities. I apologize deeply. I will definitely keep tabs on whats going on here and will put in a clear thumbs up or down in time . I wont leave you hanging. Ling.Nut 1743, 18 August 2007 PS One problem with the econ section is that it makes no attempt to tease apart the relative degree of praiseblame that Reagan should get for economic events as opposed to the praiseblame due to Congress. I dunno, I suppose one brief mention, done in an appropriate place, could be enough, given that most of the fullblown details should be in the Reaganomics article Ling.Nut 1801, 18 August 2007 MUCH improved already. It looks to me like past edits had sacrificed accuracy for brevity, because of claims the article was too long. If this article is too long , then something MUST be done about the FA Ketuanan Melayu . Whats good for the goose is good for the gander. It also appears that simplistic arguments had crept into the text to satisfy a certain POV your rewrite is much more thorough. SandyGeorgia 1803, 18 August 2007 Well I have gone thorugh what was added and tried to simplify some of the words and make the section sound more netural I have probably been labeled as POV rightwing nut more than anyone on Wiki, but if this article even has just a few POV statements, its not going to pass. Great job Sandy and Lig.Nut on all your work in the Reaganomics section. I think the reason why Congress was largley overlooked was that this article is about Ronald Reagan, not the Congress. Although Congress might deserve a mention or two, I know that I was trying to focus it more on Ronald Reagan. Try adding things about Congress into the Reaganomics article. Nonetheless, thanks so much to both of you for your help. Best, Happyme22 1831, 18 August 2007 Support Sumoeagle179 1945, 18 August 2007 Thanks Happyme22 2012, 18 August 2007 Comment Though this article is extensive in coverage in a compact way, I feel there isnt a need to make a separate section for the popularity poll . It could rather be integrated in the article in a single sentence. Having a opinion poll as a separate section, doesnt go well with the overall standards set by the article. Trimming it will also trim the article on the whole. Good article BTW. Regards, Knowledge Hegemony 0929, 19 August 2007 Well thanks for your comment. Are you talking about the subsection in the Legacy section entitled Popular opinion We are saying that Ronald Reagan is regarded to be on of the most popular presidents and we have to give examples to back that up, for its been attacked numerous times. Maybe Im missing your point, but is that what you mean Happyme22 1706, 19 August 2007 Strong Oppose There is still lots of debate over POVNPOV of this article. I added a peer review page so we could get some feedback on this and was informed on my user page that an article is not supposed to be both up for featured article status and under peer review . This needs more editing and a through peer review of POVNPOV more than it needs a star. Wikipediatoperfection 1915, 19 August 2007 If you dont bring up actionable points, your oppose itself is likely to be perceived as POVbased. Would you please list POV details that are a source of concern to you, here on this page, so they can be addressed if necessary Thanks Ling.Nut 1919, 19 August 2007 Per instructions at both WPFAC and WPPR, articles listed at FAC are to be removed from PR . The article is not undergoing POV debate it is undergoing the routine improvements that happen during FAC. If you have POV issues, pls list them so they can be addressed. SandyGeorgia 1923, 19 August 2007 List as Requested There is a disagreement on the talk page as to whether he should be called a controversial president. I would say that there is no question that he was a controversial president. Both the contents of the article and objective outside sources reflect that. It should be stated within the intro, but not in the first sentence of the article, that he was a controversial figure. Look at Jimmy Carter, a controversial president does it say on his page James Earl Carter, Jr. the controversial 39th president No, because all presidents are controversial. If the presidents a Democrat, Dems will like him and Repubs wont, making him a controversial figure, and visaversa. Happyme22 2132, 19 August 2007 Clintons page doesnt say he was controversial either nonstarter. SandyGeorgia 2156, 19 August 2007 I think this discussion is best confined to the talk page where it has been on going. This same argument has been used on the talk page and it has been unconvincing to those who think the word should be included in the introduction. The talk page has several arguments for adding the word that have gone substantively unanswered. I will add more to the talk page on this issue and we can continue the discussion there. Wikipediatoperfection 0738, 20 August 2007 Reaganonmics section As has been pointed out in the talk page this section divides into one section of raw data, considered the facts, and another section, the criticism. This section is unbalanced and poorly written. The section recently had a facelift, is much more neutral and gives both sides of the Reagan economic record. Your comment here is very vaugue for we do not have facts and criticism. Those comments you were reading on the talk page were written before this problem was fixed and addressed by UserSandyGeorgia, UserLing.Nut, UserPaul.h, and myself. Happyme22 2132, 19 August 2007 This structural issue seems to be resolved. I was going off memory when I wrote this. This section is still POV ProReaganomics. There is no explanation of why critics called it trickle down economics. Real wages have stagnated since Reagan . This article has done a good job outlining the proReaganomics positionstatistics but it lacks a well reasoned critique of Reaganomics. When we are talking about Reagan being called controversial, this is what we are talking about. This was massively controversial and still is. Wikipediatoperfection 0837, 20 August 2007 The War on Drugs section This could use a good edit. It seems haphazardly thrown together. I think we could all look at the war on drugs article as a reference point. In terms of POVNPOV I do not think either point of view is well represented in this section, but the counterargument particularly leaves something to be desired. The assessment of the War on Drugs and Reagans drug policies seems to lack the advantage of time. What do I mean by this Most people today agree that that the War on Drugs has not worked. That is not to say that there is a consensus that the US should stop, but there is a consensus that past efforts have largely failed. I think this is at least part of the counterargument that is missing from this section. This section should mention the ballooning prison population as a result of the war on drugs. Can you cite the claim that most people think the war on drugs hasnt worked And thats in todays world, not the world on the 80s. Happyme22 2132, 19 August 2007 Please dont reference other Wiki articles, as they are rarely reliable, and this article must stay tightly focused on its subject. SandyGeorgia 2156, 19 August 2007 I said that most people think the War On Drugs has not worked in the past because I have never met someone, liberal or conservative, who thinks it is going well. A quick google search popped up a 1995 poll which has only 11 of Americans giving the War on Drugs an A or a B in terms of drugrelated crime. Only 2 gave As. The best results were for Drugs and the Workplace where 13 of Americans gave an A or a B. Here is the source I can work on finding a more recent poll from a better known source for you, but I think the results are going to be roughly the same. Wikipediatoperfection 0612, 20 August 2007 I noticed after I wrote this that you said And thats in todays world, not the world on the 80s. I think this is myopic in outlook. The over the top, but apt analogy is quoting someone who died of a drug overdose on what an awesome high you get. This is about Reagans policy in the 80s , but it is also about the lack of positive results both in the 80s and later on from the policies . There is a fairly strong consensus in the wide world that these policies had little or not effect on drug usedrug problems. This is shown by the poll above. This side of the story should be in this section, minus my over the top analogy and with proper reliable sources of course. Wikipediatoperfection 0813, 20 August 2007 Air traffic controllers strike This summary of the main article leaves the reader wondering why on earth this is important enough to make a Presidents page. This is because it lacks the context of the strikes importance. For the right it is seen as marking a balance between business and organized labor. For the left it is seen as crippling organized labor and workers ability to fight for decent wages. Whichever side youre on this section does not due justice to what both sides consider a major turning point in the history of organized labor in the United States. As it is, someone who knew nothing about the topic would think it merited deletion from Reagans article. This article is about Reagan in order to remain tightly focused and stay within WPSIZE guidelines, every issue cant be explored in depth here. Its enough to mention that it was an issue. SandyGeorgia 2156, 19 August 2007 Again, this is not about making it longer or looking at the issue in depth per see, it is about placing the issue within its proper context so that the reader understands why the section is there. I think we can do this and keep this section down to size. As it currently stands I do not see how a reader who knows nothing about the event could possibly understand why this is important enough to make a Presidents page. If I did not know better, I would ask, what is the significance of this Why is this important As it stands currently the section does not justify its existence. It does belong in the article, but it needs some work to show why. Wikipediatoperfection 0146, 20 August 2007 IranContra Affair This section solely quotes Reagans denial of any personal involvement and has nothing substantive on the Tower Commissions report. Even if we talk Reagan at face value , the Tower Commissions report was highly critical of Reagan. From the IranContra affair main page It did not determine that the President had knowledge of the extent of the program, although it argued that the President ought to have had better control of the National Security Council staff. The wording of the report surprised some since it was expected to have been weak in its criticism of the President. Instead, it heavily criticized President Reagan for not properly supervising his subordinates or being aware of their actions. This information is certainly worth adding to this section to balance it out. I would also suggest adding that Reagans testimony before the commission had inconsistencies and he had troubles recalling certain things. Here is how the main IranContra affair puts it President Reagan appeared before the Tower Commission on December 2, 1986, to answer questions. His answers were not entirely consistent, and he was plagued with poor memory, because the questions were regarding details that occurred months and years prior. It was also said that during the time in question he was almost constantly using heavy pain medications. We should never take text from another Wiki article and if you think the text there is accurate, then this article does the right thing by linking to it. For this article to remain tightly focused and within size guidelines, it need not repeat detail covered in another article. SandyGeorgia 2156, 19 August 2007 See discussion at bottom of section, this info is needed to balance the article. Wikipediatoperfection 0128, 20 August 2007 I added a sentence recommened by Wikipediatoperfection for balance about the determinatino of the Tower Commission. Happyme22 0243, 20 August 2007 This is exactly what I am talking about. You made a good faith effort to try and balance the article. However, you did not add a sentence recommended by me. You added your own sentence in the place recommended by me. Your sentence distorts its BBC source. I believe this is the sentence you added The commission determined that the president did not have knowledge of the extent of the program, therefore he didnt lie to the American people, but criticized him heavily for not properly supervising his subordinates or being aware of their actions. Now here is the critical passage from the BBC article Mr Reagan gave the impression of knowing little of what was going on. The Tower Commission report on the scandal absolved him from deliberately lying to the American people but criticised him for being out of touch. Later the final Congressional report laid the blame squarely on the president. It declared If the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing, he should have. The report was seen as a devastating indictment of Mr Reagans style of government. Your sentence is an extremely selective and deceptive cherry pick of this BBC article. I assume you edited in good faith, but you are quite simply incapable of unbiased coverage of Reagans darkermore criminal moments. Just as I am incapable of writing unbiased coverage of what his supporters consider to be his successes. Your sentence absolutely distorts the BBC source. They did not find he did not lie to the American people, they found he did not deliberately lie. We already quote Reagans denial of any wrongdoing, you do not need to further cover his ass, especially with things which were highly critical of it. The congressional report laid the blame squarely with Reagan. And as the BBC puts it, The report was seen as a devastating indictment of Mr Reagans style of government. This is what is missing from this article. It also goes back to the issue of controversial. Gingrich may have tried to impeach Clinton for lying about a blow job while he himself was having an affair, but most of the public do not see Clinton as a crook. Certainly not in the way he ran the White House. There is a large portion of the American electorate who do not simply dislike Nixon, Reagan, and George W. Bush, they think they wereare crooks. Wikipediatoperfection 1930, 20 August 2007 I suppose I did try and pick the mostcarefull wording, and I didnt include the Congressional report because I didnt want the section to be too long . Youre talking about not having POV, but here you are expressing it. Its a very biased and POV statement to say that most of the country doesnt think that Clintons a crook, but thinks that Nixon, Reagan and Bush are. I could argue the exact opposite by saying Clinton was impeached and Nixon, Reagan and Bush werent . Happyme22 2158, 20 August 2007 ... Reagans darkermore criminal moments ...hmmm, hello pot, this is the kettle speaking. By the way, it might be helpful if yall would move the big discussions of specific text to the article talk page. SandyGeorgia 2314, 20 August 2007 I laughed out loud at that Still, I think that what hes saying is that the article was written by too many pots and not enough kettles. Haukur 2338, 20 August 2007 I think it might be helpful if I reviewed this section and see what you thought IranContra Affair In 1986, the Reagan Administration was found to have illegally sold arms to Iran to fund the anticommunist Contras in Nicaragua. The IranContra Affair was the largest political scandal in the United States during the 1980s. President Reagan professed ignorance of the plots existence and quickly called for an Independent Counsel to investigate. Norman H. Gardner Jr., a congressional specialist for the CIA, said that Reagan signed a finding, which was drafted by the CIA two months after the missile shipment, intended to help free U.S. hostages in the Mideast. The International Court of Justice ruled that the U.S. had violated international law in Nicaragua due to its treaty obligations and the customary obligations of international law not to intervene in the affairs of other states. John Tower, Edmund Muskie and Brent Scowcroft made up the nonpartisan, threeman Tower Commission, appointed by Reagan, to review the scandal. The commission determined that the president did not have knowledge of the extent of the program, therefore he didnt lie to the American people, but criticized him heavily for not properly supervising his subordinates or being aware of their actions. Secretary of Defense Casper Weinberger was indicted for perjury and later received a presidential pardon from George H. W. Bush. In 2006, historians ranked the IranContra affair as one of the ten worst mistakes by a U.S. president. According to The Washington Post , some Central Americans criticize Reagan for his support of the Contras, saying he was an anticommunist zealot, blinded to human rights abuses, while others say he saved Central America and helped nurture democratic governments and freemarket systems across the region. Daniel Ortega, Sandinistan leader of Nicaragua from 1979 to 1990, said that he hoped God would forgive Reagan for his dirty war against Nicaragua. We can discuss the various criticisms in here, but even if you think only half of them are accurate, this section has serious problems with POV which are reflective of the article. The best way I can describe it is the criticism of Reagan is given a some critics say, but look what a great guy he is treatment. Wikipediatoperfection 2039, 20 August 2007 Look at the section now. Happyme22 2235, 20 August 2007 Easily fixed to fairly include the BBC coverage in a more complete way. As an aside, I think that your comments regarding your opinion of how the American people view President Reagan or Clinton are irrelevant to whether this article should be featured. JCO312 1957, 20 August 2007 I had originally written that most CentralAmericans didnt like Reagan because of this this this, but someone added how he is liked there for balance. Happyme22 2203, 20 August 2007 Cold War Star Wars This section also seems to lack the benefit of time in relation to Star Wars. The way the article puts it is Reagan said Star Wars would work, critics said it wouldnt. This may have been the disagreement at the time , however, we now have the perspective of time that the DoD still cant get something similar to Star Wars to remotely work 30 years later . I dont fully understand your point. Happyme22 2132, 19 August 2007 What I understand is that, if this article explored in detail every topic as suggested, it would be 3 times too long. Right now, it makes excellent use of summary style, and the interested reader can go to the other articles for additional detail. SandyGeorgia 2156, 19 August 2007 My point, which in retrospect was not very clear, is that many people think it was not simply a difference of some say it would work, some say it wouldnt. His critics do not think he was simply wrong about this, they think he sort of knew it would not work, but did not care, ignored the science, and pushed for it anyway. My point was that with the perspective of time it is fairly clear that Reagan was full of it when he said Star Wars was technically feasible. Wikipediatoperfection 2045, 20 August 2007 Legacy This section reads like a fan page. It lacks a serious analysis of his legacy from the left or the right. This part of the section should be seen as a starting point for a serious look at his legacy Reagans supporters believe that much of Americas success today can be attributed to Ronald Reagan, including a more efficient and more prosperous economy,Appleby, Joyce , p. 924 a peaceful end to the Cold War, and a world safer from the threat of nuclear war.Beschloss, Michael , p. 324 Critics argue that his economic policies caused huge budget deficits, tripling the United States national debt. Umm can I ask whats wrong with this Citations are provided. Happyme22 2132, 19 August 2007 This is the part that is fine. What I am saying is that the rest of the legacy section reads like a fan page and this quote from the article should be the starting point for a good legacy section. Wikipediatoperfection 2151, 19 August 2007 Example of fan page text, please SandyGeorgia 2156, 19 August 2007 If Ronald Reagan were my hero I would put this quote on my wall The noted presidential biographer Richard Reeves summarized in President Reagan The Triumph of Imagination that Reagan understood Ronald Reagan is not my hero, but this quote is currently the lead in to the legacy section. Wikipediatoperfection 0120, 20 August 2007 I removed the quote, because I can see how it can be POVish. Happyme22 0808, 21 August 2007 Also, please look at the Legacy section now. It is much more neutral and presents a more fair picture of Reagans legacy. Happyme22 1747, 24 August 2007 This seems to me to be a sufficient list of problems that need to be tackled before it can be a featured article. I obviously expect there to be disagreement on a lot of what I have criticized , but I think a lot of my criticism is that from both the right and the left this article lacks substance on certain issues. I think this is particularly true of the legacy section and the articles general lack of explanation of Reagans importance in shaping the conservative movement. For better or for worse, Reagans presidency was a coming out party for the conservative movement. This is missing from the legacy section and largely missing from the article. Wikipediatoperfection 2120, 19 August 2007 Ive added my comments to the above questionable issues. Happyme22 2140, 19 August 2007 Im a bit worried that youre quoting from other Wikipedia articles, expecting this article to incorporate information from an unreliable source. SandyGeorgia 2136, 19 August 2007 I think the wiki articles are a good starting point, a quick way to show you what I am saying. These other Wikipedia articles could be better referenced and we can find good sources for what they are saying. However, once this content is better sourced, it will essentially say the same thing as the Wikipedia articles Wikipediatoperfection 2151, 19 August 2007 Which means theres no reason to repeat the text here, since this article is already at the size guideline. SandyGeorgia 2219, 19 August 2007 I have to agree with Sandy. It seems pointless to repeat whats said in other articles in this article. Happyme22 2232, 19 August 2007 And I have to say that I am not surprised at all, you two have agreed on everything up and down this page. I think you are both missing what I am trying to say. I am not saying that the article should be longer per se, I am saying that the above information is what I think needs to be incorporated to make the article NPOV. Without info from the Tower report andor hearings the section on the IranContra affair is unbalanced. What you are saying to me is the equivalent of me saying to you, Oh, you think the article in antiReagan You think Reagan had no knowledge that IranContra was going on Well, why would we we repeat text here. That is in other articles anyway. The important information, that he could not recall certain things during the hearing and that the Tower report was extremely critical of Reagan is all there. The article is already to size, why would we add your text to it This may be over the top, but I think it will make my point. There is a time and place for sending things to smaller sub articles and that is when uncontroversial nonessential background information is cluttering the page. This hardly qualifies. I am going to try to respond to all of your questions above as quickly as possible. Out of curiosity, I know Happyme22 is the main conservative contributor main contributor overall to this article, but is there a main liberalprogressive contributor to this article The reason I ask is because I think that, correct me if I am wrong, this article has primarily been written by diligent Reagan fans who have in general made great strides to make the article NPOV, but do not have a regular main liberal or progressive contributor to balance the article out. Anyway, this is my impression, correct me if Im wrong. You are unlikely to change my mind this go around. If this fails to become a feature article this time around I would be willing to work with both of you , make significant contributions, iron out the sections where we have differences, reach a consensus, and recommend the page together to be a featured article. Wikipediatoperfection 0036, 20 August 2007 Well I added a sentence in the Iran Contra affair section about the Tower Commissions findings. Is that better Happyme22 0245, 20 August 2007 Support . This article is wellwritten and welllaid out. The issue of POV is a difficult one with any political figure in living memory, but the editors of this article have done a very good job of keeping things as neutral as possible. Coemgenus 2036, 19 August 2007 Thanks a lot Happyme22 2113, 19 August 2007 ReComment Yes, Happyme22 I was talking about the subsection Popular opinion in Legacy in my earlier comment. Knowledge Hegemony 0635, 20 August 2007 Ok well I removed the header and kept I think 2 out of the 4 setences that were in the section. I wanted to keep the most recent polls as well. Does the section look better Happyme22 1754, 21 August 2007 Neither oppose or support I dont see any explanation of his politicoeconomic philosophy. I think thats crucial for an article on Reagan. Operation Spooner 0402, 21 August 2007 Please provide bullet pointsoutline for reference... what exactly are you requesting Ling.Nut 0422, 21 August 2007 Well, he read the classical liberal economists, such as Bastiat, Mises, and Hayek. He accepted their prescriptions as his own. His economic philosophy was laissezfaire. And if you listen to his inaugural speech it was very antigovernment control over the economy, antiwelfare state, and proselfreliance. If we are to know the man, we need to know more about what he was thinking. There was a method to his madness. There has to be references out there explaining his philosophy and what writers influenced him. What was the message in the speeches he wrote Without this, I think the article is too superficial. Operation Spooner 0445, 21 August 2007 Well thanks for your comment. Happyme22 0808, 21 August 2007 I see there is a Religious beliefs and philosophy section. There should be a discussion of his political and economic philosophy there. Operation Spooner 1826, 21 August 2007 If you oppose the article over a single matter than why dont you fix it yourself, because you seem to know what youre talking about per one of Wikis policies Be Bold. Happyme22 0630, 22 August 2007 I added something about it. I changed my mind about it being in the philosophy section. It is only a sentence and is essential. Other than opposition to political communism, his economic philosophy of selfreliance, low taxation, opposition to the welfare state, is what he was all about. He spoke about it all the time. It deserves a sentence in the introduction. Operation Spooner 2249, 22 August 2007 You and I have worked that out. Would you consider supporting now Happyme22 0129, 23 August 2007 Support Well done. Shane 1303, 21 August 2007 Thanks Happyme22 1720, 21 August 2007 Conditional Support Support The last time I voted on this FAC I objected because of prose. Im not comfortable stating that any article has brilliant prose, but to pick two other terms in the criteria I certainly think it is engaging and of a professional standard. As for my conditional support, there are a few things that bugged me Regarding Reagan tested the Presidential waters in 1968 as part of a Stop Nixon movement which included those from the partys far right. Reagan won the pledges of some 600 delegates, but Richard Nixon quickly steamrolled to the nomination the steamroll comment left me thinking how So I went to Richard Nixon, not covered there either. So finally I made it to United States presidential election, 1968Republican Party nomination which explains. Of course a paragraph of the same size would be crazy here maybe just say Nixon arrived at the convention with 98 of the votes needed for the nomination. ...oh and possibly link one of the words using the piped, maybe convention Happyme22 2321, 21 August 2007 Led by William J. Casey, the 1980 presidential campaign was made me read it twice. Would it not be better to say Reagans 1980 presidential campaign, managed by William J. Casey, was... Happyme22 2321, 21 August 2007 The diaries were recently published is a nono. Recently soon becomes out of date. More accurate to say The Diaries were published in May 2007 anyway. Happyme22 2321, 21 August 2007 In his first inaugural address, which Reagan himself wrote,50 he addressed the economic malaise he inherited, arguing Government is not the solution to our problems government is the problem. The Reagan Presidency began in an historic manner on 20 January 1981 just 30 minutes into his inaugural address, 52 American hostages, held by Iran for 444 days were set free.51 is disjointed. Would it not be better to say In his first inaugural address on 20 January 1981,..... rather than mentioning the date later. Happyme22 2328, 21 August 2007 Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger aborted the mission, however, reportedly because of his concerns that it would harm U.S. relations with other Arab nations. is both too significant to remain unreferenced and also weasel words without a reference i.e. reportedly I worded this a little more neutrally, but I dont know if I can find a source for that, so I just said the mission was aborted. Happyme22 2345, 21 August 2007 Also, this instance is Caspar a later instance says Casper I believe the former is the correct one and the latter should be corrected. Happyme22 2345, 21 August 2007 In 2006, historians ranked the IranContra affair as one of the ten worst mistakes by a U.S. president would be better to say 9th in the top ten worst... Gives it a better context and I personally was interested to see and had to go to the reference. Happyme22 2345, 21 August 2007 Good work though to all involved. Mark83 1822, 21 August 2007 The check marks I added speak for themselves Would you consider a totally supporting Happyme22 2229, 21 August 2007 Oppose. I also see NPOV issues with this article, particularly in the legacy section. I opposed commented on the last nomination of this article, and none of the concerns I raised were addressed. Instead of a balanced assessment of the impact of the Reagan presidency, we have quotes from what people said at his funeral. People say nice things at everyones funeral Get a historian and not a eulogist to tell me what Reagans legacy is. Calliopejen1 0837, 22 August 2007 I have added two critiques of Reagan in the Legacy section, and removed the Dick Cheney quote. See what you think. Happyme22 2201, 22 August 2007 Well, now its more balanced, but its still insubstantial. I would hope after reading an article about Ronald Reagan, the reader would have a good idea of who thought he was a good president, who thought he was a bad president, and why. All we have now is a couple people gushing, and a couple people saying the gushing is unwarranted. Calliopejen1 1004, 23 August 2007 Please look at the Legacy section now. I have removed all the quotes by George Bush, Bill Clinton, etc., and replaced them with quotes by historians. Better Happyme22 1747, 24 August 2007 Comment Theres a misplaced modifier in the lead After surviving an assassination attempt during his first term, experiencing a period of economic growth ,1 and ordering a military operation in Grenada, Reagan was.... Surely it was the U.S., not Reagan, that experienced the period of economic growth. Perhaps substitute overseeing for experiencing Although I guess some might argue thats not NPOV. 69.202.45.153 1517, 22 August 2007 I have done that. Thanks for the headsup. Happyme22 2201, 22 August 2007 Strongly Oppose The legacy section in particular is highly biased in Reagans favour and the clique of selfconfessed Reaganites will not allow any mention of how his policies directly lead the deaths of some 300,000 in Central America. SmokeyTheCat TALK 2150, 22 August 2007 You are also the one who thinks Ronald Reagan is a murderer and wanted that to be written in the article. We already took your advice and wrote that many Central Americans dont think highly of him at all. And you still have not provided a citation to show that Reagans policies led to the death of 300,000 Central Americans. Happyme22 2201, 22 August 2007 Even a busted clock is correct twice a day, Hap. All of the users Big Bag of Crazy aside, he makes a valid point that he is largely reviled by a large number of people even now, almost 30 years later. That balance is missing from the article. Arcayne 0422, 23 August 2007 Lets see what he wrote on my talk page The Contras were not anticommunist because the Nicaraguan government was not communist. See the Wiki page on the FSLN. I am not committing vandalism I am correcting an error which I will continue to do. If you have some Godlike power to block me then I hope you feel really good about yourself for supressing the truth. SmokeyTheCat TALK 0647, 22 August 2007 While were on the subject I note that you call yourself a Christian. Well, you may care to know that some 300,000 died in Central America as a direct result of your hero Reagans policies 60,000 in Nicaragua, 80,000 in El Salvador and the rest in Guatemala. The Contra terrorists gouged out eyes, chopped of genitalia, stabbed pregnant women in the belly. These were all routine. Those charming freedomlovers who Reagan called the moral equivalent of the French Resistance. And for what What possible treat did these tiny countries thousands of miles away from the USA pose. I will tell you a threat to the profits of United Fruit and Del Monte. The landreform policies of the FSLN were a threat to the profit margins of these two USbased fruit multinationals. Block me if it makes to feel better to deny these truths but I must tell you that I am Christian too and one day we will both have to stand before God. Dont say you werent warned. SmokeyTheCat TALK 0916, 22 August 2007 NPOV I even consider that a personal attack And a citation still has not been provided Happyme22 1657, 23 August 2007 Strongly Oppose This article reads like a Republican Party advertisement. The Lead is so over the top with peacocking and overblown claims that reflect little of its actual purpose of reflecting the article via summary. The sections are bloated, and on one case utterly unnecessary. there seems to be strong opposition to change within the article, and a significant rewrite is long, long overdue. However, the pics are nice. Arcayne 0422, 23 August 2007 Well we have already talked about the lead on the talk page when I get around to it in the next few days Im going to work with you on the lead and well come up with something. And I will get rid of the religious views section and incporate the text throughout. Best, Happyme22 1657, 23 August 2007 Support Good article, seems neutral and generally stable once the wording is fixed in the above critiques, should be good to go. Judgesurreal777 0442, 23 August 2007 Thanks a lot Happyme22 1657, 23 August 2007 Comment. The honors section seems needlessly long and listy and would probably be better summarized and moved to a subpage. Im not sure what work has been done to incorporate the criticism that Wikipediatoperfection mentioned was lacking, but I think that is definitely more important than this if were prioritizing for space. Calliopejen1 1011, 23 August 2007 Actually theres been a lot that was done. We removed much of the lessimportant things named after Reagan and made room for a more neutral Reaganomics section. The Iran Contra affair I must admit is a lot more neutral, with substantial criticisms of Reagan and his admin. The War on drugs was almost completly redone... Wikipediatoperfection has had an impact on this article, bottom line. Happyme22 1657, 23 August 2007 Strongly Oppose On two grounds 1. Does not comply with requirements for FAC, specifically stability and neutrality. This is a fan page strongly protected by partisans who gang up on anyone who points out factual errors, POV concerns, and innappropriate sources, and calls them antiReagan . It is not neutral, and it is not stable. 2. The second objection is far more serious this is the time we are being asked to consider this article for FAC within a very short period of time. Besides taking up a lot of valuable time , each time the article is submitted before the concerns, problems and errors have been completely resolved...there appears to be a great anxiety on the part of the owner that this article achieve FAC status, as soon as possible and at all costs. That alone should raise enough eyebrows regarding its acceptance as FAC. Info999 1721, 23 August 2007 Comment Please do us all a favor and reread WPNPA. Then live it. Comment Perhaps you would like to point out exactly how you think Ive violated this policy The policy guards against attacks against a person, instead of arguments against reasoning, sourcing, logic, etc. I have attacked no one personally. Relevant factoid, Ling the policy expressly states that accusing someone without justification of failing to adhere to the policy is in itself a violation of the policy Info999 1847, 23 August 2007 As for the articles multiple noms.. in fact.. if it fails this time, then I plan to hit it very very hard in the first or second week of next month ... yes I like Reagan but am a scholar first, last and always, so Ill be keen on NPOV. Then I plan to renom it almost immediately. So feel free to include me in the broad brush strokes of your ad hominem comments if you like, even though I hadnt touched this article before this particle FAC nom. Ling.Nut 1815, 23 August 2007 Comment Again, you accuse me of something bad without being able to point to any specifics. Pointing out that an article is a fan lovefest is not a personal attack, even on those who are participating in the lovefest Not only is the neutrality of this article regularly questioned by wellmeaning and politicallyneutral editors , but it should concern many of us that there is a great urgency to have it accepted as an FA while continually failing to adhere to the rules governing FAs, and continually failing to be accepted. Info999 1847, 23 August 2007 So Ive nominated this 5 of 6 times and it has failed all times...so what The MOS doesnt say how many times an article canshould be nominated therefore your second objection is irrelevant. This time we actually have 12 supports and it just might stand a chance of passing. And if it doesnt, like Ling.Nut said, theres a pretty good chance it will pass soon afterward. I know this is suprising to you Info but Im going to complement you yes me, the mean old conservative. Thank you, Info999, for adding more facts to the iran Contra affair section and making it more balanced Happyme22 0348, 24 August 2007 Rephrasing then Comment on content , not on the contributor . . But I had forgotten the cardinal rule that responding to ad hominem is always and everywhere conterproductive, because people who resort to it never admit they are making ad hominem attacks, never admit any viewpoint beside their own, etc etc etc. So will strike all above.. as per WPUSELESS. Ling.Nut 1922, 23 August 2007 Comments . Its remarkable how this FAC has brought out the POV pushers and unsubstantiated claims about editors protecting the article. I dont have this article watchlisted, did not support it on the previous SIX FACs, and have largely confined my edits to ref and MOS cleanup . The POV of the persons opposing the nomination is abundantly apparent and no actionable POV has been identified and backed by reliable sources. If POV pushers can sidetrack this nom, then they should take an equally close look at the featured article Barack Obama or the standards set on Wiki for featured bios by articles like Austin Nichols. A double standard is at play here, and POV pushers appear to be attempting to destabilize the article so they can claim its unstable. Ah, such is the Wiki Will they succeed Only Raul knows. SandyGeorgia 1312, 24 August 2007 Oppose . The Borateen image is still listed as a work of the US Federal Government, which makes no sense. Just because its found on a .gov website doesnt mean its in the public domain. Haukur 1543, 24 August 2007 The picture problem has been fixed. Would you consider striking your opposition Happyme22 1643, 24 August 2007 Good SandyGeorgia 1644, 24 August 2007 Support . I take note of the many opposes, but suggest that every president is controversial, and is both beloved and behated . There simply isnt room enough in one article to explore the many nooks and crannies of the arguments on both sides, but this article does a good job of at least bringing them to the table. I strongly suggest that all remaining concerns be addressed in subarticles, such as Reaganomics Cheers Ling.Nut 1817, 24 August 2007 Thanks Ling.Nut for your help Best, Happyme22 1843, 24 August 2007 Support I believe I read once that, by definition, the president of the united states is always simultaneously the mostloved and mostdespised person in politics. I read the article with only consideration of the POVconcerns. I come away with the impression that he did some things quite well, some things quite poorly, and historians and pundits disagree about a lot of it. The article takes an excellent and appropriate just the facts, mam approach. Bravo JayHenry 0230, 25 August 2007 Thanks a lot Best, Happyme22 0303, 25 August 2007 Refuse to participate usually Ill just quietly abstain from FAC discussions, but in this case I think some uninvolved commentary might prove useful. While most articles that reach FA status have some good shepherds who steward articles through the FAC process, I think that weve moved past that and are bordering on ownership issues. When each and every comment or concern is vehemently dissected and answered, and each support vote is thanked by the same one or two editors it has a chilling effect on dissent and discussion. Couple that with said shepherds characterizing opposition as invalid and we have a process that is hopelessly tainted. I would vote strong oppose for many of the reasons listed above, but I dont care to have my motives challenged or have a list of POV concerns nitpicked by those who are pushing so hard to have a gold star at the top of this article. I have no doubt that this FAC will probably pass, however my abstinance should serve as a record of concern regarding the validity and vigorousness of preFA discussion. Blaxthos 1314, 25 August 2007 The above discussion is preserved as an archive. Please do not modify it. Subsequent comments should be made on the articles talk page or in Wikipedia talkFeatured article candidates. No further edits should be made to this page.
The following is an archived discussion of a featured article nomination. Please do not modify it. Subsequent comments should be made on the articles talk page or in Wikipedia talkFeatured article candidates. No further edits should be made to this page. The article was promoted by UserSandyGeorgia 2151, 3 January 2009 Benjamin Harrison Nominator Coemgenus This article was promoted to GA a few months back, thanks to the work of editor Charles Edward, among others. Since then, Ive added some more information and believe it to be of FAquality. Coemgenus 2312, 23 December 2008 Comment John Sherman, PanAmerican Congress, and University Club should be dabbed. hep Talk to me 0018, 24 December 2008 Done Coemgenus 0300, 24 December 2008 Support After a few reads and the below comments I cant find any more issues. hep Talk to me 0202, 27 December 2008 Comment . This article is very good. I found one statement which needs a citation For the third vacancy, which arose in 1892, Harrison nominated George Shiras. Shirass appointment was controversial because his age sixty was considered advanced at the time. Majoreditor 0234, 24 December 2008 The cite is to the same pages as the previous cite, so I added it again. I changed the wording a bit the issue apparently wasnt that they thought he would die soon, something to do with his pension. Coemgenus 0321, 24 December 2008 Nicely done. Question would the legacy section benefit by adding a brief assessment of the effectiveness of his presidency and public attitude toward Harrison Majoreditor 0405, 24 December 2008 Im not sure there is any public perception of him nowadays. Ill look in the sources. Coemgenus 1618, 24 December 2008 Support Weak Support I read the article with great interest. I found no major problems that can prevent it from becoming featured. I only want to say that according to MOS you should use either spaced ndash or unspaced mdash . Spaced mdash should not be used. I fixed spaced mdashes myself, but you should check, because I might have missed something. The only problem that I found is the Legacy section. It actually says nothing about legacy, but contains mainly trivia. I think the section should be disbanded and the information should be distributed among other sections. Ruslik 1106, 24 December 2008 I integrated it see my comment below. Coemgenus 1719, 24 December 2008 Query In the tariff section the phrase was had the is ambiguous and the whole section is unclear as to whether the measure was passed. Either the measure went through in which case it was the or it failed to be enacted and would have been ereSpielChequers 1334, 24 December 2008 Fixed that one. Coemgenus 1703, 24 December 2008 Also you have a map for the Presidential election he lost, but why no map for the election he won ereSpielChequers 1642, 24 December 2008 I added the 1888 map. The 1892 map is colored as it is to represent the Michigan divided its votes between the two candidates. Coemgenus 1708, 24 December 2008 Thanks for all that. ereSpielChequers 1800, 24 December 2008 The dispute with Chile has a different explanation for the riot than the article linked. Accepting refugees in one and intervention in the other. Worth checking that out and bringing the articles into line with each other . The post Presidential section leaves me with some questions Apart from the boycot of their fathers wedding to their cousin there is no further mention of the rift with his elder children, were matters subsequently resolved If his time in California was brief, in which year did it end Why in an otherwise chronological section was the book publication out of sequence, was that when it was written Why was his book not published for nearly two decades after his death ereSpellCheckers 0058, 26 December 2008 Support Of course I have spent considerable time working on this article myself, so I am a bit biased . The legacy section is the only area I am still concerned about as is noted above. It was in fact a trivia section at one point, which I significantly pared downed, put into prose, and labeled legacy hoping to at some point get more information on his legacy . We should probably remove that section and try to integrate into the rest of the article before we grant FA status. Charles Edward 1402, 24 December 2008 I would be glad to remove it and integrate the relevant parts. Coemgenus 1617, 24 December 2008 OK, I moved some of it to a section called technology, since it didnt seem to fit anywhere else. The list of stuff named after him I deleted Ive never liked those lists in a biogrpahy article, since for more popular presidents they can go on forever. Coemgenus 1718, 24 December 2008 Comments In the Early legal career section, specify In the same year. At the end of the section, theres a man named Fishbank but the firm was called Fishback which is right Theres a redlink for the Regiment in the Civil War section link can be removed if no article exists. In the next paragraph, the 70th Indiana sounds weird. Should the image of the house in the Early legal career section go under Indiana politics by to build a grand new home in Indianapolis. losing by 5,084 votes How few is that out of how many Under United States Senator, do we know which cabinet position he was offered Election over Cleveland 90,000 fewer popular votes How much is that in proportion to the total number cast The postpresidency section, especially the Venezuela attorney part, could be lengthened a little, especially since its mentioned in the lead. I did some copyediting throughout the article, mostly punctuation and minor phrasing, but these are what I wasnt sure about. Overall it is an excellent and very informative article. I had read it in a very short state last year, and you have done an excellent job improving it Reywas92 Talk 1808, 24 December 2008 I have added total vote numbers for the two instances you noted. In regards to the cabinet position, my sources do not indicate which position, but only states a position in the Garfield cabinet. I also expanded the post presidency section a bit with another source. I also corrected the name of the Indiana regiment and changed the link to point to the Indiana regiments page. Charles Edward 1936, 24 December 2008 Thanks for fixing them. The sources I have also dont specify which cabinet job. 70th Indiana is the form of name Ive heard for other Civil War regiments, too, so Id suggest we leave that as is. Christmas Eve probably wasnt the best time for me to nominate this for FA, but Ill try to keep up Coemgenus 2007, 24 December 2008 Comments Comprehensiveness worries. I only read the Family and education section, but I feel like it could be beefed up a bit to better describe his background. It does an adequate job giving a timeline of what happened in his early life, but I think an FA biography should go a bit deeper. He was seven when his grandfather was sworn in as President. What kind of impact did this have on his childhood He maintained a membership in the Sons of the American Revolution. Whos he In 1845...In 1847...In 1850 The repetition makes for some dull reading here. he was provided with a tutor Was he struggling with his studies He had tutors before this though, according to Calhoun and Moore. The quotation from his first tutor Harriet Root about him being the brightest of the family might do well integrated here. What kind of childhood did he have Was his family welloff Middle class What did his father do at the time In 1847 he was enrolled in Farmers College Might want to make it clear whether this was for preparatory or undergraduate work. No mention of the deaths of his mothersiblings and how it affected him No mention of the influence of Robert Hamilton Bishop Why did he want to transfer How did he do at Miami University How did his activitiesperformance there shape him Might want to devote some words to his decision to pursue law instead of the ministry after graduation. No description of how he metfell in love with Caroline Lavinia Scott BuddingJournalist 2257, 24 December 2008 I added some details of his early life. I dont want to add too much, partly because it will be of less interest to most readers than his adult life, and partly because there isnt much about it in the sources I have. Do you think Bishop influenced him that much Calhoun devotes two paragraphs to Bishop, but never mentions him again. If you have access to the Sievers books, there may be more in there but I dont, so I can add no more than I have. Coemgenus 0055, 25 December 2008 True, one certainly needs to strike a balance. I just feel that more discussion would be worthwhile on how his childhood and early life shaped him and his future, rather than listing what happened . For example, see the early life section of Ronald Reagan, which discusses his faith. Both Calhoun and Moore say that he was heavily influenced by Bishop, and Calhoun spends time talking about his political writingsspeeches he made while at Miami University. I think itd be interesting to note that at Miami, he was already distinguishing himself as a leader and public speaker. The full text of Sievers is available online for free courtesy of the great folks of archive.org BuddingJournalist 0247, 25 December 2008 Thanks for pointing me to that website for the Sievers Ill look it over and see if he has anything to add, and Ill see if I can summarize some pertinent info from the other sources, too. Coemgenus 0453, 25 December 2008 I added a bit from Sievers to the Early Life section. Only the first volume is online, so I wont be able to do the same for later parts of his life. Coemgenus 1554, 28 December 2008 Comments Current ref 100 what makes a reliable source Its a fairly wellknown site thats been used as a source in other FAs Youve got it double cited here in this article, but it certainly looks like a self published website to me, meaning it needs to satisfy WPSPS. Ealdgyth Talk 1628, 26 December 2008 The National Archives site gives the information well enough, so is there any harm in leaving the Leip site also, which presents the same information in a more eyepleasing way Ill take it out, if you want, but I dont see the harm in having two sources there. Youre welcome to leave it in, but its use here wont help prove its reliablity. Probably a good compromise would be to put it in the external links section. Ealdgyth Talk 1732, 26 December 2008 OK, I moved them there. Coemgenus 1819, 26 December 2008 If you use the Benjamin Harrison book in the footnotes, you need to list it in the references, not the further reading. Done. Coemgenus 1617, 26 December 2008 The Adelson book is a juvenile per Amazon, might it not be better to use a better source Done. Coemgenus 1617, 26 December 2008 Otherwise, sources look okay, links checked out with the link checker tool. Ealdgyth Talk 1600, 26 December 2008 There are many image layout issues . Official White House portrait of Benjamin Harrison is looking off the page, and several images are above sections rather than within them. SandyGeorgia 1755, 26 December 2008 I think Ive corrected the issues youve mentioned. Please let me know if there are further inconsistencies with the MOS. Coemgenus 1808, 26 December 2008 My comments that werent addressed End of Early legal career section The mans name is listed as Fishbank but the firms is listed as Fishback. Whats right Its Fishback. I fixed it. Coemgenus 1638, 27 December 2008 Shouldnt the image of his home in the Early legal career section go under Indiana politics by to build a grand new home in Indianapolis. Moved it. Coemgenus 1638, 27 December 2008 Also, should it be noted in the States admitted section that Harrison admitted the most states after GW Id rather not. Im not sure this is really Harrisons achievement, or that the admission of the first 15 was really Washingtons. Coemgenus 1638, 27 December 2008 I changed my mind and added it. Coemgenus 1556, 28 December 2008 All other comments of mine were taken care of already. Good work. Reywas92 Talk 0309, 27 December 2008 Support Excellent Reywas92 Talk 1936, 29 December 2008 Support . Meets FA criteria. Majoreditor 2325, 29 December 2008 Question about research The first thing I did when I came to this article was look at the list of references consulted. I was shocked that there were so few and shocked that the article relies almost exclusively on one biography. However, I know nothing about Harrison scholarship, so, I trotted over to JSTOR and looked up a review of the Calhoun biography. Unfortunately there was only one . It was generally positive, but it mentioned that the biography is part of a TIME series that clearly hopes to appeal to a wide audience. Im concerned that the scholarly biographies on Harrison have not been used to write this article. Unfortunately, I do not know what those are. Have the editors endeavored to find and use all of the biographies of Harrison while researching and writing this article For most of the major biographical articles Ive written , Ive had to read seven or eight biographies and I havent written on a figure as wellknown as a US president. Awadewit 1315, 31 December 2008 All biographies I know of were used, with the exception of the second and third volume of Sievers. If you discover any others, and if I am able to procure them, I will be glad to see if they have any new information worth adding. Coemgenus 1558, 31 December 2008 Wow This is like Harriet Tubman How strange that there are only a handful of biographies. What is in the second and third volumes of Sievers Awadewit 2345, 1 January 2009 It is unfortunate even though the TIME series isnt perfect, for many of the lesserknown Presidents, its their first biography in decades. Sievers volume one stops at 1865. Vol. 2 is up to 1885, and vol. 3 is from then until his death. Coemgenus 0337, 2 January 2009 Did you not have access to those volumes or something Awadewit 1238, 2 January 2009 Theyre not in any library near me, and Im not buying them. Volume 1 is online, for some reason, but the site does not have the other two volumes. Coemgenus 1538, 2 January 2009 But when there are so few biographies, it seems like we should use all of them dont you think Did you try interlibrary loan Ill try to go to the library and see what kinds of differences there are between the article and the second and third volumes . Awadewit 1621, 2 January 2009 Oppose on criterion 3 FileGenBenHarrison.jpg Without an author for this image, we cannot assert that 100 years plus the life of the author has passed. Do any of the Harrison books give more information on this photo, such as its publication date or its photographer I changed it to PD1923, which is more accurate. Coemgenus 1610, 31 December 2008 I added nineteenth century to the date field and unknown to the author field. We can be reasonably sure this photograph was published then, since Harrison died in 1901. It would, of course, be nicer to know that. Awadewit 0002, 2 January 2009 FileElectoralCollege1888.svg This image needs to include a source for the electoral distribution. Please also add a description of the map to the description field, including the year of the election, the candidates, etc. I added a source for the data. Coemgenus 1610, 31 December 2008 Sources for images need to be reliable. This is a website run by an independent, though conscientious citizen, making it selfpublished. We need something that meets WPRS. Awadewit 0002, 2 January 2009 I found the info on the U.S. archives website, and added it. Why is everyone suddenly down on Leips site Ive used it as a source in three previous FAs without objection, and Ive yet to find an error. I also added a caption.Coemgenus 0326, 2 January 2009 FileHarrison Football Political Cartoon.jpg This image is missing source, date, and author. This ones hard to find, but in this book it gives the source for it and many others. A useful volume for Gilded Age political cartoons. Coemgenus 1647, 31 December 2008 FileBillion dollar Congress.jpg Do you have the issue and volume number for the magazine this was published in Note that WPIUP says A good source for an image from a book is to provide all information about the book , date of copyright, publisher information and not just title and author. This is true for magazines as well. No, I dont. Coemgenus 1610, 31 December 2008 FileUss baltimore c3.jpg We need a link to the source at the navy site for this image. If there is more information regarding it at the navy site, that would be good to include. Added it. Coemgenus 1624, 31 December 2008 FileDJBrewer.jpg The LOC page says copyright Clinedust, Washington, DC but it also says createdpublished c.1907. Now, if it was published in 1907, it is in the PD because it was published before 1923. However, it was only created in 1907, that is not the case. Do you know anything else about this photo The LOC says it was published in 1907. Thats good enough for me. Coemgenus 1610, 31 December 2008 The LOC says that is was createdpublished in 1907, as I stated above. There is a difference between being created in 1907 or published in 1907 . Since, the LOC is claiming that Clinedust owns the copyright, we need to be sure that this image was published before 1923. That is why I am asking, do you have any further information regarding the publication of this image Awadewit 0012, 2 January 2009 I didnt upload it all I know is what is contained on the source page on the LOC website. I doubt theyre violating the copyright any more than we are, but I cant substantiate it from the info there. Coemgenus 0327, 2 January 2009 The LOC leaves it up to users to determine copyright see their extensive tutorial here. Not everything in the LOC is PD and not everything has enough information allowing us to use it on Wikipedia . The way around the problem with this image would be to demonstrate that the author has been dead for over 70 years , 95 years since the first publication or 120 years since the creation of the work. That is why it is important to know when the image was published versus when it was created . You can see why the publishcreation distinction is important. We can only use the image if it was published over 95 years ago. I was hoping one of the Harrison books might mention it. Awadewit 1238, 2 January 2009 I swapped it for a different pic. On the new pictures page at LOC, it says there are no known restrictions on reproduction. Coemgenus 1552, 2 January 2009 No known restrictions actually doesnt mean PD. We have to establish PD. It looks like this passes the pre1923 test, since no one else is claiming the copyright and we have a reason to believe it was published before 1923. Lucky, since the photographer died in 1952 Awadewit 1617, 2 January 2009 FileBharrison.gif This image is missing date and author. I added them. Coemgenus 1614, 31 December 2008 File1892 Electoral Map.png This map needs to include a description of what is represented as well as the source from which the information was obtained. I added the source info. Coemgenus 1624, 31 December 2008 See above comment on this source. Also, please add a brief description of the information contained in the map. Note that the candidates full names are not contained in the map. Thanks. Awadewit 0018, 2 January 2009 I added the source. I also added a caption. Coemgenus 0326, 2 January 2009 The image description page needs a description of the image there is no entry in the description field. Awadewit 1238, 2 January 2009 Oh, I see. I added one. Coemgenus 1538, 2 January 2009 I added the first names of the candidates. Awadewit 1617, 2 January 2009 FileBenjamin Harrison, head and shoulders bw photo, 1896.jpg This needs to link to the image description page, not to the image itself, as outlined at WPIUP. I fixed it. Coemgenus 1634, 31 December 2008 These issues should not be difficult to resolve. Awadewit 1400, 31 December 2008 Striking oppose. Awadewit 1621, 2 January 2009 The above discussion is preserved as an archive. Please do not modify it. No further edits should be made to this page.
Chester Alan Arthur was an American attorney and politician who served as the 21st President of the United States from 1881 to 1885 he succeeded James A. Garfield upon the latters assassination. At the outset, Arthur struggled to overcome a slightly negative reputation, which stemmed from his early career in politics as part of New Yorks Republican political machine. He succeeded by embracing the cause of civil service reform. His advocacy for, and subsequent enforcement of, the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act was the centerpiece of his administration. Arthur was born in Fairfield, Vermont, grew up in upstate New York, and practiced law in New York City. He served as quartermaster general in the New York Militia during the American Civil War. Following the war, he devoted more time to Republican politics and quickly rose in the political machine run by New York Senator Roscoe Conkling. Appointed by President Ulysses S. Grant to the lucrative and politically powerful post of Collector of the Port of New York in 1871, Arthur was an important supporter of Conkling and the Stalwart faction of the Republican Party. In 1878, the new president, Rutherford B. Hayes, fired Arthur as part of a plan to reform the federal patronage system in New York. When Garfield won the Republican nomination for president in 1880, Arthur, an eastern Stalwart, was nominated for vice president to balance the ticket. After just half a year as vice president, Arthur found himself in the executive mansion due to the assassination of his predecessor. To the surprise of reformers, Arthur took up the cause of reform, though it had once led to his expulsion from office. He signed the Pendleton Act into law and strongly enforced its provisions. He gained praise for his veto of a Rivers and Harbors Act that would have appropriated federal funds in a manner he thought excessive. He presided over the rebirth of the United States Navy, but was criticized for failing to alleviate the federal budget surplus, which had been accumulating since the end of the Civil War. Suffering from poor health, Arthur made only a limited effort to secure the Republican Partys nomination in 1884 he retired at the close of his term. Journalist Alexander McClure later wrote, No man ever entered the Presidency so profoundly and widely distrusted as Chester Alan Arthur, and no one ever retired... more generally respected, alike by political friend and foe. Although his failing health and political temperament combined to make his administration less active than a modern presidency, he earned praise among contemporaries for his solid performance in office. The New York World summed up Arthurs presidency at his death in 1886 No duty was neglected in his administration, and no adventurous project alarmed the nation. Mark Twain wrote of him, It would be hard indeed to better President Arthurs administration. Over the 20th and 21st centuries, however, Arthurs reputation mostly faded among the public. Early life Birth and family Chester Alan Arthur was born October5, 1829, in Fairfield, Vermont. Arthurs mother, Malvina Stone, was born in Vermont, the daughter of George Washington Stone and Judith Stevens. Malvinas family was primarily of English and Welsh descent, and her grandfather, Uriah Stone, fought in the Continental Army during the American Revolution. His father, William Arthur, was born in Dreen, Cullybackey, County Antrim, Ireland to a Presbyterian family of primarily Scottish and English descent he graduated from college in Belfast and emigrated to Canada in 1819 or 1820. Arthurs mother met his father while William Arthur was teaching at a school in Dunham, Quebec, just over the border from her native Vermont. The two married in Dunham on April 12, 1821, soon after meeting. After their first child, Regina, was born, the Arthurs moved to Vermont. They quickly moved from Burlington to Jericho, and finally to Waterville, as William received positions teaching at different schools. William Arthur also spent a brief time studying law, but while still in Waterville, he departed from both his legal studies and his Presbyterian upbringing to join the Free Will Baptists he spent the rest of his life as a minister in that sect. William Arthur became an outspoken abolitionist, which often made him unpopular with some members of his congregations and contributed to the familys frequent moves. In 1828, the family moved again, to Fairfield, where Chester Alan Arthur was born the following year he was the fifth of nine children. He was named Chester after Chester Abell, the physician and family friend who assisted in his birth, and Alan for his paternal grandfather. The family remained in Fairfield until 1832, when William Arthurs profession took them on the road again, to churches in several towns in Vermont and upstate New York. The family finally settled in the Schenectady, New York area. Arthur had seven siblings who lived to adulthood. His complete list of brothers and sisters included Regina , the wife of William G. Caw, a grocer, banker, and community leader of Cohoes, New York who served as town supervisor and village trustee Jane Almeda , the wife of James H. Masten, who served as postmaster of Cohoes and publisher of the Cohoes Cataract newspaper Ann , a career educator who taught school in New York, as well as working in South Carolina in the years immediately before and after the Civil War. Malvina , the wife of Henry J. Haynesworth, who was an official of the Confederate government and a merchant in Albany, New York before being appointed as a captain and assistant quartermaster in the U.S. Army during Arthurs presidency William , a medical school graduate who became a career Army officer and paymaster, he was wounded during his Civil War service. William Arthur retired in 1898 with the brevet rank of lieutenant colonel, and permanent rank of major. George Mary , the wife of John E. McElroy, an Albany businessman and insurance executive, and Arthurs official White House hostess during his presidency The familys frequent moves later spawned accusations that Chester Arthur was not a nativeborn citizen of the United States. When Arthur was nominated for vice president in 1880, a New York attorney and political opponent, Arthur P. Hinman, initially speculated that Arthur was born in Ireland and did not come to the United States until he was fourteen years old. Had that been true, opponents might have argued that Arthur was constitutionally ineligible for the vice presidency under the United States Constitutions naturalborncitizen clause. When Hinmans original story did not take root, he spread a new rumor that Arthur was born in Canada. This claim, too, failed to gain credence. Education Arthur spent some of his childhood years living in the New York towns of York, Perry, Greenwich, Lansingburgh, Schenectady, and Hoosick. One of his first teachers said Arthur was a boy frank and open in manners and genial in disposition. During his time at school, he gained his first political inclinations and supported the Whig Party. He joined other young Whigs in support of Henry Clay, even participating in a brawl against students who supported James K. Polk. Arthur also supported the Fenian Brotherhood, an Irish republican organization founded in America he showed this support by wearing a green coat. Arthur enrolled at Union College, in Schenectady, New York, in 1845, where he studied the traditional classical curriculum. As a senior, he was president of the debate society and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. During his winter breaks, Arthur served as a teacher at a school in Schaghticoke. After graduating, Arthur returned to Schaghticoke and became a fulltime teacher, and soon began to pursue an education in law. While studying law, he continued teaching, moving closer to home by taking a job at a school in North Pownal, Vermont. Coincidentally, future president James A. Garfield taught penmanship at the same school three years later, but the two did not cross paths during their teaching careers. In 1852, Arthur moved again, to Cohoes, New York, to become the principal of a school at which his sister, Malvina, was a teacher. In 1853, after studying at State and National Law School in Ballston Spa, New York, and then saving enough money to relocate, Arthur moved to New York City to read law at the law office of Erastus D. Culver, an abolitionist lawyer and family friend. When Arthur was admitted to the New York bar in 1854, he joined Culvers firm, which was subsequently renamed Culver, Parker, and Arthur. Early career New York lawyer Arthur as a young lawyer Arthur married Ellen Herndon in 1859. When Arthur joined the firm, Culver and New York attorney John Jay were pursuing a habeas corpus action against Jonathan Lemmon, a Virginia slaveholder who was passing through New York with his eight slaves. In Lemmon v. New York , Culver argued that, as New York law did not permit slavery, any slave arriving in New York was automatically freed. The argument was successful, and after several appeals was upheld by the New York Court of Appeals in 1860. Campaign biographers would later give Arthur much of the credit for the victory in fact his role was minor, although he was certainly an active participant in the case. In another civil rights case in 1854, Arthur was the lead attorney representing Elizabeth Jennings Graham after she was denied a seat on a streetcar because she was black. He won the case, and the verdict led to the desegregation of the New York City streetcar lines. In 1856, Arthur courted Ellen Herndon, the daughter of William Lewis Herndon, a Virginia naval officer. The two were soon engaged to be married. Later that year, he started a new law partnership with a friend, Henry D. Gardiner, and traveled with him to Kansas to consider purchasing land and setting up a law practice there. At that time, the state was the scene of a brutal struggle between proslavery and antislavery forces, and Arthur lined up firmly with the latter. The rough frontier life did not agree with the genteel New Yorkers after three or four months the two young lawyers returned to New York City, where Arthur comforted his fiance after her father was lost at sea in the wreck of the SS Central America . In 1859, they were married at Calvary Episcopal Church in Manhattan. After his marriage, Arthur devoted his efforts to building his law practice, but also found time to engage in Republican party politics. In addition, he indulged his military interest by becoming Judge Advocate General for the Second Brigade of the New York Militia. Civil War In 1861, Arthur was appointed to the military staff of Governor Edwin D. Morgan as engineerinchief. The office was a patronage appointment of minor importance until the outbreak of the Civil War in April 1861, when New York and the other northern states were faced with raising and equipping armies of a size never before seen in American history. Arthur was commissioned as a brigadier general and assigned to the state militias quartermaster department. He was so efficient at housing and outfitting the troops that poured into New York City that he was promoted to inspector general of the state militia in April 1862, and then to quartermaster general that July. He had an opportunity to serve at the front when the 9th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment elected him colonel early in the war, but at Governor Morgans request, he turned it down to remain at his post in New York. He also turned down command of four New York City regiments organized as the Metropolitan Brigade, again at Morgans request. The closest Arthur came to the front was when he traveled south to inspect New York troops near Fredericksburg, Virginia, in May 1862, shortly after forces under Major General Irvin McDowell seized the town during the Peninsula Campaign. That summer, he and other representatives of northern governors met with Secretary of State William H. Seward in New York to coordinate the raising of additional troops, and spent the next few months enlisting New Yorks quota of 120,000 men. Arthur received plaudits for his work, but his post was a political appointment, and he was relieved of his militia duties in January 1863 when Governor Horatio Seymour, a Democrat, took office. When Reuben Fenton won the 1864 election for governor, Arthur requested reappointment Fenton and Arthur were from different factions of the Republican Party, and Fenton had already committed to appointing another candidate, so Arthur did not return to military service. On April 5, 1882, Arthur was elected to the District of Columbia Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States as a Third Class Companion, the honorary membership category for militia officers and civilians who made significant contributions to the war effort. He was assigned MOLLUS insignia number 2430. In addition, Grand Army of the Republic posts in Ogdensburg, Wisconsin and Medford, Oregon were named in his honor. Arthur returned to being a lawyer, and with the help of additional contacts made in the military, he and the firm of Arthur Gardiner flourished. Even as his professional life improved, however, Arthur and his wife experienced a personal tragedy as their only child, William, died suddenly that year at the age of three. The couple took their sons death hard, and when they had another son, Chester Alan Jr., in 1864, they lavished attention on him. They also had a daughter, Ellen, in 1871. Both children survived to adulthood. Arthurs political prospects improved along with his law practice when his patron, exGovernor Morgan, was elected to the United States Senate. He was hired by Thomas Murphy, a Republican politician, but also a friend of William M. Tweed, the boss of the Tammany Hall Democratic organization. Murphy was also a hatter who sold goods to the Union Army, and Arthur represented him in Washington. The two became associates within New York Republican party circles, eventually rising in the ranks of the conservative branch of the party dominated by Thurlow Weed. In the presidential election of 1864, Arthur and Murphy raised funds from Republicans in New York, and they attended Abraham Lincolns inauguration in 1865. New York politician Conklings machine The New York Custom House was Arthurs office for seven years. The end of the Civil War meant new opportunities for the men in Morgans Republican machine, including Arthur. Morgan leaned toward the conservative wing of the New York Republican party, as did the men who worked with him in the organization, including Weed, Seward , and Roscoe Conkling . Arthur rarely articulated his own political ideas during his time as a part of the machine as was common at the time, loyalty and hard work on the machines behalf was more important than actual political positions. At the time, U.S. Custom Houses were managed by political appointees who served as Collector, Naval Officer and Surveyor. In 1866, Arthur unsuccessfully attempted to secure the position of Naval Officer at the New York Custom House, a lucrative job subordinate only to the Collector. He continued his law practice and his role in politics, becoming a member of the prestigious Century Club in 1867. Conkling, elected in 1867 to the United States Senate, noticed Arthur and facilitated his rise in the party, and Arthur became chairman of the New York City Republican executive committee in 1868. His ascent in the party hierarchy kept him busy most nights, and his wife resented his continual absence from the family home on party business. Conkling succeeded to leadership of the conservative wing of New Yorks Republicans by 1868 as Morgan concentrated more time and effort on national politics, including serving as chairman of the Republican National Committee. The Conkling machine was solidly behind General Ulysses S. Grants candidacy for president, and Arthur raised funds for Grants election in 1868. The opposing Democratic machine in New York City, known as Tammany Hall, worked for Grants opponent, former New York Governor Horatio Seymour while Grant was victorious in the national vote, Seymour narrowly carried the state of New York. Arthur began to devote more of his time to politics and less to law, and in 1869 he became counsel to the New York City tax commission, appointed when Republicans controlled the state legislature. He remained at the job until 1870 at a salary of 10,000 a year. Arthur resigned after Democrats controlled by William M. Tweed of Tammany Hall won a legislative majority, which meant they could name their own appointee. In 1871 Grant offered to name Arthur as Commissioner of Internal Revenue, replacing Alfred Pleasonton Arthur declined the appointment. In 1870, President Grant gave Conkling control over New York patronage, including the Customs House at the Port of New York. Having become friendly with Murphy over their shared love of horses during summer vacations on the Jersey Shore, in July of that year, Grant appointed him to the Collectors position. Murphys reputation as a war profiteer and his association with Tammany Hall made him unacceptable to many of his own party, but Conkling convinced the Senate to confirm him. The Collector was responsible for hiring hundreds of workers to collect the tariffs due at the United States busiest port. Typically, these jobs were dispensed to adherents of the political machine responsible for appointing the Collector. Employees were required to make political contributions back to the machine, which made the job a highly coveted political plum. Murphys unpopularity only increased as he replaced workers loyal to Senator Reuben Fentons faction of the Republican party with those loyal to Conklings. Eventually, the pressure to replace Murphy grew too great, and Grant asked for his resignation in December 1871. Grant offered the position to John Augustus Griswold and William Orton, each of whom declined and recommended Arthur. Grant then nominated Arthur, with the New York Times commenting, his name very seldom rises to the surface of metropolitan life and yet moving like a mighty undercurrent this man during the last 10 years has done more to mold the course of the Republican Party in this state than any other one man in the country. The Senate confirmed Arthurs appointment as Collector he controlled nearly a thousand jobs and received compensation as great as any federal officeholder. Arthurs salary was initially 6,500, but senior customs employees were compensated additionally by the moiety system, which awarded them a percentage of the cargoes seized and fines levied on importers who attempted to evade the tariff. In total, his income came to more than 50,000 more than the presidents salary, and more than enough for him to enjoy fashionable clothes and a lavish lifestyle. Among those who dealt with the Custom House, Arthur was one of the eras more popular collectors. He got along with his subordinates and, since Murphy had already filled the staff with Conklings adherents, he had few occasions to fire anyone. He was also popular within the Republican party as he efficiently collected campaign assessments from the staff and placed party leaders friends in jobs as positions became available. Arthur had a better reputation than Murphy, but reformers still criticized the patronage structure and the moiety system as corrupt. A rising tide of reform within the party caused Arthur to rename the financial extractions from employees as voluntary contributions in 1872, but the concept remained, and the party reaped the benefit of controlling government jobs. In that year, reformminded Republicans formed the Liberal Republican party and voted against Grant, but he was reelected in spite of their opposition. Nevertheless, the movement for civil service reform continued to chip away at Conklings patronage machine in 1874 Custom House employees were found to have improperly assessed fines against an importing company as a way to increase their own incomes, and Congress reacted, repealing the moiety system and putting the staff, including Arthur, on regular salaries. As a result, his income dropped to 12,000 a year more than his nominal boss, the Secretary of the Treasury, but far less than what he had previously received. Clash with Hayes A cartoon depicting President Rutherford B. Hayes kicking Arthur out of the New York Custom House Arthurs fouryear term as Collector expired on December10, 1875, and Conkling, then among the most powerful politicians in Washington, arranged his protgs reappointment by President Grant. By 1876, Conkling was considering a run for the presidency himself, but the selection of reformer Rutherford B. Hayes by the 1876 Republican National Convention preempted the machine boss. Arthur and the machine gathered campaign funds with their usual zeal, but Conkling limited his own campaign activities to a few speeches. Hayess opponent, New York Governor Samuel J. Tilden, carried New York and won the popular vote nationwide, but after the resolution of several months of disputes over twenty electoral votes , he lost the presidency. Hayes entered office with a pledge to reform the patronage system in 1877, he and Treasury Secretary John Sherman made Conklings machine the primary target. Sherman ordered a commission led by John Jay to investigate the New York Custom House. Jay, with whom Arthur had collaborated in the Lemmon case two decades earlier, suggested that the Custom House was overstaffed with political appointments, and that 20 of the employees were expendable. Sherman was less enthusiastic about the reforms than Hayes and Jay, but he approved the commissions report and ordered Arthur to make the personnel reductions. Arthur appointed a committee of Custom House workers to determine where the cuts were to be made and, after a written protest, carried them out. Notwithstanding his cooperation, the Jay Commission issued a second report critical of Arthur and other Custom House employees, and subsequent reports urging a complete reorganization. Hayes further struck at the heart of the spoils system by issuing an executive order that forbade assessments, and barred federal office holders from ...taking part in the management of political organizations, caucuses, conventions, or election campaigns. Arthur and his subordinates, Naval Officer Alonzo B. Cornell and Surveyor George H. Sharpe, refused to obey the presidents order Sherman encouraged Arthur to resign, offering him appointment by Hayes to the consulship in Paris in exchange, but Arthur refused. In September 1877, Hayes demanded the three mens resignations, which they refused to give. Hayes then submitted the appointment of Theodore Roosevelt, Sr., L. Bradford Prince, and Edwin Merritt to the Senate for confirmation as their replacements. The Senates Commerce Committee, chaired by Conkling, unanimously rejected all the nominees the full Senate rejected Roosevelt and Prince by a vote of 31 25, and confirmed Merritt only because Sharpes term had expired. Arthurs job was only spared until July 1878, when Hayes took advantage of a Congressional recess to fire him and Cornell, replacing them with the recess appointment of Merritt and Silas W. Burt. Hayes again offered Arthur the position of consul general in Paris as a facesaving consolation Arthur again declined, as Hayes knew he probably would. Conkling opposed the confirmation of Merritt and Burt when the Senate reconvened in February 1879, but Merritt was approved by a vote of 31 25, as was Burt by 31 19, giving Hayes his most significant civil service reform victory. Arthur immediately took advantage of the resulting free time to work for the election of Edward Cooper as New York Citys next mayor. In September 1879 Arthur became Chairman of the New York State Republican Executive Committee, a post in which he served until October 1881. In the state elections of 1879, he and Conkling worked to ensure that the Republican nominees for state offices would be men of Conklings faction, who had become known as Stalwarts. They were successful, but narrowly, as Cornell was nominated for governor by a vote of 234 216. Arthur and Conkling campaigned vigorously for the Stalwart ticket and, owing partly to a splintering of the Democratic vote, were victorious. Arthur and the machine had rebuked Hayes and their intraparty rivals, but Arthur had only a few days to enjoy his triumph when, on January12, 1880, his wife died suddenly while he was in Albany organizing the political agenda for the coming year. Arthur felt devastated, and perhaps guilty, and never remarried. Election of 1880 Garfield Arthur campaign poster Conkling and his fellow Stalwarts, including Arthur, wished to follow up their 1879 success at the 1880 Republican National Convention by securing the nomination for their ally, exPresident Grant. Their opponents in the Republican party, known as HalfBreeds, concentrated their efforts on James G. Blaine, a Senator from Maine who was more amenable to civil service reform. Neither candidate commanded a majority of delegates and, deadlocked after thirtysix ballots, the convention turned to a dark horse, James A. Garfield, an Ohio Congressman and Civil War General who was neither Stalwart nor HalfBreed. Garfield and his supporters knew they would face a difficult election without the support of the New York Stalwarts and decided to offer one of them the vice presidential nomination. Levi P. Morton, the first choice of Garfields supporters, consulted with Conkling, who advised him to decline, which he did. They next approached Arthur, and Conkling advised him to also reject the nomination, believing the Republicans would lose. Arthur thought otherwise and accepted. According to a purported eyewitness account by journalist William C. Hudson, Conkling and Arthur argued, with Arthur telling Conkling, The office of the VicePresident is a greater honor than I ever dreamed of attaining. Conkling eventually relented, and campaigned for the ticket. As expected, the election was close. The Democratic nominee, General Winfield Scott Hancock, was popular and, having avoided taking definitive positions on most issues of the day, he had not offended any pivotal constituencies. As Republicans had done since the end of the Civil War, Garfield and Arthur initially focused their campaign on the bloody shirt the idea that returning Democrats to office would undo the victory of the Civil War and reward secessionists. 1880 electoral vote results With the war fifteen years in the past and Union generals at the head of both tickets, the tactic was less effective than the Republicans hoped. Realizing this, they adjusted their approach to claim that Democrats would lower the countrys protective tariff, which would allow cheaper manufactured goods to be imported from Europe, and thereby put thousands out of work. This argument struck home in the swing states of New York and Indiana, where many were employed in manufacturing. Hancock did not help his own cause when, in an attempt to remain neutral on the tariff, he said that the tariff question is a local question, which only made him appear uninformed about an important issue. Candidates for high office did not personally campaign in those days, but as state Republican chairman, Arthur played a part in the campaign in his usual fashion overseeing the effort in New York and raising money. The funds were crucial in the close election, and winning his home state of New York was critical. The Republicans carried New York by 20,000 votes and, in an election with the largest turnout of qualified voters ever recorded 78.4 they won the nationwide popular vote by just 7,018 votes. The electoral college result was more decisive 214 to 155 and Garfield and Arthur were elected. Vice presidency Arthur taking the oath of office as administered by Judge John R. Brady at Arthurs home in New York City, September20, 1881 After the election, Arthur worked in vain to persuade Garfield to fill certain positions with his fellow New York Stalwarts especially that of the Secretary of the Treasury the Stalwart machine received a further rebuke when Garfield appointed Blaine, Conklings archenemy, as Secretary of State. The running mates, never close, detached as Garfield continued to freeze out the Stalwarts from his patronage. Arthurs status in the administration diminished when, a month before inauguration day, he gave a speech before reporters suggesting the election in Indiana, a swing state, had been won by Republicans through illegal machinations. Garfield ultimately appointed a Stalwart, Thomas Lemuel James, to be Postmaster General, but the cabinet fight and Arthurs illconsidered speech left the President and Vice President clearly estranged when they took office on March4, 1881. The Senate in the 47th United States Congress was divided among 37 Republicans, 37 Democrats, one independent who caucused with the Democrats, one Readjuster , and four vacancies. Immediately, the Democrats attempted to organize the Senate, knowing that the vacancies would soon be filled by Republicans. As vice president, Arthur cast tiebreaking votes in favor of the Republicans when Mahone opted to join their caucus. Even so, the Senate remained deadlocked for two months over Garfields nominations because of Conklings opposition to some of them. Just before going into recess in May 1881, the situation became more complicated when Conkling and the other Senator from New York, Thomas C. Platt, resigned in protest of Garfields continuing opposition to their faction. With the Senate in recess, Arthur had no duties in Washington and returned to New York City. Once there, he traveled with Conkling to Albany, where the former Senator hoped for a quick reelection to the Senate, and with it, a defeat for the Garfield administration. The Republican majority in the state legislature was divided on the question, to Conkling and Platts surprise, and an intense campaign in the state house ensued. While in Albany on July 2, Arthur learned that Garfield had been shot. The assassin, Charles J. Guiteau, was a deranged officeseeker who believed that Garfields successor would appoint him to a patronage job. He proclaimed to onlookers I am a Stalwart, and Arthur will be President Guiteau was found to be mentally unstable, and despite his claims to be a Stalwart supporter of Arthur, they had only a tenuous connection that dated from the 1880 campaign. More troubling was the lack of legal guidance on presidential succession as Garfield lingered near death, no one was sure who, if anyone, could exercise presidential authority. Also, after Conklings resignation, the Senate had adjourned without electing a president pro tempore , who would normally follow Arthur in the succession. Arthur was reluctant to be seen acting as president while Garfield lived, and for the next two months there was a void of authority in the executive office, with Garfield too weak to carry out his duties, and Arthur reluctant to assume them. Through the summer, Arthur refused to travel to Washington and was at his Lexington Avenue home when, on the night of September19, he learned that Garfield had died. Judge John R. Brady of the New York Supreme Court administered the oath of office in Arthurs home at 215a.m. on September20. Later that day he took a train to Long Branch to pay his respects to Garfield and to leave a card of sympathy for his wife, afterwards returning to New York City. On the 21st, he returned to Long Branch to take part in Garfields funeral, and then joined the funeral train to Washington. Before leaving New York, he ensured the presidential line of succession by preparing and mailing to the White House a proclamation calling for a Senate special session. This step ensured that the Senate had legal authority to convene immediately and choose a Senate president pro tempore, who would be able to assume the presidency if Arthur died. Once in Washington he destroyed the mailed proclamation and issued a formal call for a special session. Presidency 1881 85 On the threshold of office, what have we to expect of him In an 1881 Puck cartoon, Arthur faces the cabinet after President Garfield was shot. Taking office Arthur arrived in Washington, D.C. on September 21. On September 22 he retook the oath of office, this time before Chief Justice Morrison R. Waite. Arthur took this step to ensure procedural compliance there had been a lingering question about whether a state court judge could administer a federal oath of office. He initially took up residence at the home of Senator John P. Jones, while White House remodeling he ordered was carried out, including the addition of an elaborate fiftyfoot glass screen made by Louis Comfort Tiffany, which remained in a White House corridor until it was dismantled in 1902. Arthurs sister, Mary Arthur McElroy, served as White House hostess for her widowed brother Arthur became Washingtons most eligible bachelor and his social life became the subject of rumors, though romantically, he remained singularly devoted to the memory of his late wife. His son, Chester Jr., was then a freshman at Princeton University and his daughter, Nell, stayed in New York with a governess until 1882 when she arrived, Arthur shielded her from the intrusive press as much as he could. Arthur quickly came into conflict with Garfields cabinet, most of whom represented his opposition within the party. He asked the cabinet members to remain until December, when Congress would reconvene, but Treasury Secretary William Windom submitted his resignation in October to enter a Senate race in his home state of Minnesota. Arthur then selected Charles J. Folger, his friend and fellow New York Stalwart as Windoms replacement. Attorney General Wayne MacVeagh was next to resign, believing that, as a reformer, he had no place in an Arthur cabinet. Despite Arthurs personal appeal to remain, MacVeagh resigned in December 1881 and Arthur replaced him with Benjamin H. Brewster, a Philadelphia lawyer and machine politician reputed to have reformist leanings. Blaine, nemesis of the Stalwart faction, remained Secretary of State until Congress reconvened, then departed immediately. Conkling expected Arthur to appoint him in Blaines place, but the President chose Frederick T. Frelinghuysen of New Jersey, a Stalwart recommended by exPresident Grant. Frelinghuysen advised Arthur not to fill any future vacancies with Stalwarts, but when Postmaster General James resigned in January 1882, Arthur selected Timothy O. Howe, a Wisconsin Stalwart. Navy Secretary William H. Hunt was next to resign, in April 1882, and Arthur attempted a more balanced approach by appointing HalfBreed William E. Chandler to the post, on Blaines recommendation. Finally, when Interior Secretary Samuel J. Kirkwood resigned that same month, Arthur appointed Henry M. Teller, a Colorado Stalwart to the office. Of the Cabinet members Arthur had inherited from Garfield, only Secretary of War Robert Todd Lincoln remained for the entirety of Arthurs term. Civil service reform Ole Peter Hansen Ballings 1881 portrait of Chester A. Arthur In the 1870s, a scandal was exposed, in which contractors for star postal routes were greatly overpaid for their services with the connivance of government officials . Reformers feared Arthur, as a former supporter of the spoils system, would not commit to continuing the investigation into the scandal. But Arthurs Attorney General, Brewster, did in fact continue the investigations begun by MacVeigh, and hired notable Democratic lawyers William W. Ker and Richard T. Merrick to strengthen the prosecution team and forestall the skeptics. Although Arthur had worked closely with Dorsey before his presidency, once in office he supported the investigation and forced the resignation of officials suspected in the scandal. An 1882 trial of the ringleaders resulted in convictions for two minor conspirators and a hung jury for the rest. After a juror came forward with allegations that the defendants attempted to bribe him, the judge set aside the guilty verdicts and granted a new trial. Before the second trial began, Arthur removed five federal office holders who were sympathetic with the defense, including a former Senator. The second trial began in December 1882 and lasted until July 1883 and, again, did not result in a guilty verdict. Failure to obtain a conviction tarnished the administrations image, but Arthur did succeed in putting a stop to the fraud. Garfields assassination by a deranged office seeker amplified the public demand for civil service reform. Both Democratic and Republican leaders realized that they could attract the votes of reformers by turning against the spoils system and, by 1882, a bipartisan effort began in favor of reform. In 1880, Democratic Senator George H. Pendleton of Ohio introduced legislation that required selection of civil servants based on merit as determined by an examination. In his first annual presidential address to Congress in 1881, Arthur requested civil service reform legislation and Pendleton again introduced his bill, but Congress did not pass it. Republicans lost seats in the 1882 congressional elections, in which Democrats campaigned on the reform issue. As a result, the lameduck session of Congress was more amenable to civil service reform the Senate approved Pendletons bill 38 5 and the House soon concurred by a vote of 155 47. Arthur signed the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act into law on January16, 1883. In just two years time, an unrepentant Stalwart had become the president who ushered in longawaited civil service reform. George Peter Alexander Healys 1884 portrait of Chester A. Arthur At first, the act applied only to 10 of federal jobs and, without proper implementation by the president, it could have gone no further. Even after he signed the act into law, its proponents doubted Arthurs commitment to reform. To their surprise, he acted quickly to appoint the members of the Civil Service Commission that the law created, naming reformers Dorman Bridgman Eaton, John Milton Gregory, and Leroy D. Thoman as commissioners. The chief examiner, Silas W. Burt, was a longtime reformer who had been Arthurs opponent when the two men worked at the New York Customs House. The commission issued its first rules in May 1883 by 1884, half of all postal officials and threequarters of the Customs Service jobs were to be awarded by merit. That year, Arthur expressed satisfaction with the new system, praising its effectiveness in securing competent and faithful public servants and in protecting the appointing officers of the Government from the pressure of personal importunity and from the labor of examining the claims and pretensions of rival candidates for public employment. Surplus and the tariff With high revenue held over from wartime taxes, the federal government had collected more than it spent since 1866 by 1882 the surplus reached 145 million. Opinions varied on how to balance the budget the Democrats wished to lower tariffs, in order to reduce revenues and the cost of imported goods, while Republicans believed that high tariffs ensured high wages in manufacturing and mining. They preferred the government spend more on internal improvements and reduce excise taxes. Arthur agreed with his party, and in 1882 called for the abolition of excise taxes on everything except liquor, as well as a simplification of the complex tariff structure. In May of that year, Representative William D. Kelley of Pennsylvania introduced a bill to establish a tariff commission the bill passed and Arthur signed it into law but appointed mostly protectionists to the committee. Republicans were pleased with the committees makeup but were surprised when, in December 1882, they submitted a report to Congress calling for tariff cuts averaging between 20 and 25. The commissions recommendations were ignored, however, as the House Ways and Means Committee, dominated by protectionists, provided a 10 reduction. After conference with the Senate, the bill that emerged only reduced tariffs by an average of 1.47. The bill passed both houses narrowly on March3, 1883, the last full day of the 47th Congress Arthur signed the measure into law, with no effect on the surplus. Congress attempted to balance the budget from the other side of the ledger, with increased spending on the 1882 Rivers and Harbors Act in the unprecedented amount of 19 million. While Arthur was not opposed to internal improvements, the scale of the bill disturbed him, as did its narrow focus on particular localities, rather than projects that benefited a larger part of the nation. On August1, 1882, Arthur vetoed the bill to widespread popular acclaim in his veto message, his principal objection was that it appropriated funds for purposes not for the common defense or general welfare, and which do not promote commerce among the States. Congress overrode his veto the next day and the new law reduced the surplus by 19 million. Republicans considered the law a success at the time, but later concluded that it contributed to their loss of seats in the elections of 1882. Foreign affairs and immigration A political cartoon from 1882, criticizing Chinese exclusion During the Garfield administration, Secretary of State James G. Blaine attempted to invigorate United States diplomacy in Latin America, urging reciprocal trade agreements and offering to mediate disputes among the Latin American nations. Blaine, venturing a greater involvement in affairs south of the Rio Grande, proposed a PanAmerican conference in 1882 to discuss trade and an end to the War of the Pacific being fought by Bolivia, Chile, and Peru. Blaine did not remain in office long enough to see the effort through, and when Frederick T. Frelinghuysen replaced him at the end of 1881, the conference efforts lapsed. Frelinghuysen also discontinued Blaines peace efforts in the War of the Pacific, fearing that the United States might be drawn into the conflict. Arthur and Frelinghuysen continued Blaines efforts to encourage trade among the nations of the Western Hemisphere a treaty with Mexico providing for reciprocal tariff reductions was signed in 1882 and approved by the Senate in 1884. Legislation required to bring the treaty into force failed in the House, however, rendering it a dead letter. Similar efforts at reciprocal trade treaties with Santo Domingo and Spains American colonies were defeated by February 1885, and an existing reciprocity treaty with the Kingdom of Hawaii was allowed to lapse. The 47th Congress spent a great deal of time on immigration, and at times was in accord with Arthur. In July 1882 Congress easily passed a bill regulating steamships that carried immigrants to the United States. To their surprise, Arthur vetoed it and requested revisions, which they made and Arthur then approved. He also signed in August of that year the Immigration Act of 1882, which levied a 50cent tax on immigrants to the United States, and excluded from entry the mentally ill, the intellectually disabled, criminals, or any other person potentially dependent upon public assistance. A more contentious debate materialized over the status of Chinese immigrants in January 1868, the Senate had ratified the Burlingame Treaty with China, allowing an unrestricted flow of Chinese into the country. As the economy soured after the Panic of 1873, Chinese immigrants were blamed for depressing workmens wages in reaction Congress in 1879 attempted to abrogate the 1868 treaty by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act, but President Hayes vetoed it. Three years later, after China had agreed to treaty revisions, Congress tried again to exclude Chinese immigrants Senator John F. Miller of California introduced another Chinese Exclusion Act that denied Chinese immigrants United States citizenship and banned their immigration for a twentyyear period. The bill passed the Senate and House by overwhelming margins, but this as well was vetoed by Arthur, who concluded the 20year ban to be a breach of the renegotiated treaty of 1880. That treaty allowed only a reasonable suspension of immigration. Eastern newspapers praised the veto, while it was condemned in the Western states. Congress was unable to override the veto, but passed a new bill reducing the immigration ban to ten years. Although he still objected to this denial of citizenship to Chinese immigrants, Arthur acceded to the compromise measure, signing the Chinese Exclusion Act into law on May6, 1882. Naval reform The Squadron of Evolution at anchor in 1889, after Yorktown had been added Chicago , Yorktown , Boston , Atlanta In the years following the Civil War, American naval power declined precipitously, shrinking from nearly 700 vessels to just 52, most of which were obsolete. The nations military focus over the fifteen years before Garfield and Arthurs election had been on the Indian wars in the West, rather than the high seas, but as the region was increasingly pacified, many in Congress grew concerned at the poor state of the Navy. Garfields Secretary of the Navy, William H. Hunt, advocated reform of the Navy and his successor, William E. Chandler, appointed an advisory board to prepare a report on modernization. Based on the suggestions in the report, Congress appropriated funds for the construction of three steel protected cruisers and an armed dispatchsteamer , collectively known as the ABCD Ships or the Squadron of Evolution . Congress also approved funds to rebuild four monitors , which had lain uncompleted since 1877. The contracts to build the ABCD ships were all awarded to the low bidder, John Roach Sons of Chester, Pennsylvania, even though Roach once employed Secretary Chandler as a lobbyist. Democrats turned against the New Navy projects and, when they won control of the 48th Congress, refused to appropriate funds for seven more steel warships. Even without the additional ships, the state of the Navy improved when, after several construction delays, the last of the new ships entered service in 1889. Civil rights Readjuster Party leader William Mahone pressed civil rights in Virginia. Like his Republican predecessors, Arthur struggled with the question of how his party was to challenge the Democrats in the South and how, if at all, to protect the civil rights of black southerners. Since the end of Reconstruction, conservative white Democrats had regained power in the South, and the Republican party dwindled rapidly as their primary supporters in the region, blacks, were disenfranchised. One crack in the solidly Democratic South emerged with the growth of a new party, the Readjusters, in Virginia. Having won an election in that state on a platform of more education funding and abolition of the poll tax and the whipping post, many northern Republicans saw the Readjusters as a more viable ally in the South than the moribund southern Republican party. Arthur agreed, and directed the federal patronage in Virginia through the Readjusters rather than the Republicans. He followed the same pattern in other Southern states, forging coalitions with independents and Greenback Party members. Some black Republicans felt betrayed by the pragmatic gambit, but others endorsed the administrations actions, as the Southern independents had more liberal racial policies than the Democrats. Arthurs coalition policy was only successful in Virginia, however, and by 1885 the Readjuster movement began to collapse with the election of a Democratic president. Other federal action on behalf of blacks was equally ineffective when the Supreme Court struck down the Civil Rights Act of 1875 in the Civil Rights Cases , Arthur expressed his disagreement with the decision in a message to Congress, but was unable to persuade Congress to pass any new legislation in its place. Arthur did, however, effectively intervene to overturn a courtmartial ruling against a black West Point cadet, Johnson Whittaker, after the Judge Advocate General of the Army, David G. Swaim, found the prosecutions case against Whittaker to be illegal and based on racial bias. The administration faced a different challenge in the West, where the LDS Church was under government pressure to stop the practice of polygamy in Utah Territory. Garfield had believed polygamy was criminal behavior and was morally detrimental to family values, and Arthurs views were, for once, in line with his predecessors. In 1882, he signed the Edmunds Act into law the legislation made polygamy a federal crime, barring polygamists both from public office and the right to vote. Native American policy Eastman Johnsons 1887 portrait of Chester A. Arthur The Arthur administration was challenged by changing relations with western Native American tribes. The American Indian Wars were winding down, and public sentiment was shifting toward more favorable treatment of Native Americans. Arthur urged Congress to increase funding for Native American education, which it did in 1884, although not to the extent he wished. He also favored a move to the allotment system, under which individual Native Americans, rather than tribes, would own land. Arthur was unable to convince Congress to adopt the idea during his administration but, in 1887, the Dawes Act changed the law to favor such a system. The allotment system was favored by liberal reformers at the time, but eventually proved detrimental to Native Americans as most of their land was resold at low prices to white speculators. During Arthurs presidency, settlers and cattle ranchers continued to encroach on Native American territory. Arthur initially resisted their efforts, but after Secretary of the Interior Henry M. Teller, an opponent of allotment, assured him that the lands were not protected, Arthur opened up the Crow Creek Reservation in the Dakota Territory to settlers by executive order in 1885. Arthurs successor, Grover Cleveland, finding that title belonged to the Native Americans, revoked Arthurs order a few months later. Health, travel, and 1884 election Arthur on an expedition in Yellowstone National Park along with Philip Sheridan and Robert Todd Lincoln Shortly after becoming president, Arthur was diagnosed with Brights disease, a kidney ailment now referred to as nephritis. He attempted to keep his condition private, but by 1883 rumors of his illness began to circulate he had become thinner and more aged in appearance, and struggled to keep the pace of the presidency. To rejuvenate his health outside the confines of Washington, Arthur and some political friends traveled to Florida in April 1883. The vacation had the opposite effect, and Arthur suffered from intense pain before returning to Washington. Later that year, on the advice of Missouri Senator George Graham Vest, he visited Yellowstone National Park. Reporters accompanied the presidential party, helping to publicize the new National Park system. The Yellowstone trip was more beneficial to Arthurs health than his Florida excursion, and he returned to Washington refreshed after two months of travel. As the 1884 presidential election approached, James G. Blaine was considered the favorite for the Republican nomination, but Arthur, too, contemplated a run for a full term as president. In the months leading up to the 1884 Republican National Convention, however, Arthur began to realize that neither faction of the Republican party was prepared to give him their full support the HalfBreeds were again solidly behind Blaine, while Stalwarts were undecided some backed Arthur, with others considering Senator John A. Logan of Illinois. Reformminded Republicans, friendlier to Arthur after he endorsed civil service reform, were still not certain enough of his reform credentials to back him over Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont, who had long favored their cause. Business leaders supported him, as did Southern Republicans who owed their jobs to his control of the patronage, but by the time they began to rally around him, Arthur had decided against a serious campaign for the nomination. He kept up a token effort, believing that to drop out would cast doubt on his actions in office and raise questions about his health, but by the time the convention began in June, his defeat was assured. Blaine led on the first ballot, and by the fourth ballot he had a majority. Arthur telegraphed his congratulations to Blaine and accepted his defeat with equanimity. He played no role in the 1884 campaign, which Blaine would later blame for his loss that November to the Democratic nominee, Grover Cleveland. Administration and cabinet Official White House portrait of Chester A. Arthur by Daniel Huntington Judicial appointments Arthur made appointments to fill two vacancies on the United States Supreme Court. The first vacancy arose in July 1881 with the death of Associate Justice Nathan Clifford, a Democrat who had been a member of the Court since before the Civil War. Arthur nominated Horace Gray, a distinguished jurist from the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court to replace him, and the nomination was easily confirmed. The second vacancy occurred when Associate Justice Ward Hunt retired in January 1882. Arthur first nominated his old political boss, Roscoe Conkling he doubted that Conkling would accept, but felt obligated to offer a high office to his former patron. The Senate confirmed the nomination but, as expected, Conkling declined it, the last time a confirmed nominee declined an appointment. Senator George Edmunds was Arthurs next choice, but he declined to be considered. Instead, Arthur nominated Samuel Blatchford, who had been a judge on the Second Circuit Court of Appeals for the prior four years. Blatchford accepted, and his nomination was approved by the Senate within two weeks. Blatchford served on the Court until his death in 1893. Retirement, death, and memorials Chester A. Arthur statue at Madison Square in New York City, Bissell 1898 Arthur left office in 1885 and returned to his New York City home. Two months before the end of his term, several New York Stalwarts approached him to request that he run for United States Senate, but he declined, preferring to return to his old law practice at Arthur, Knevals Ransom. His health limited his activity with the firm, and Arthur served only of counsel. He took on few assignments with the firm and was often too ill to leave his house. He managed a few public appearances, until the end of 1885. After spending the summer of 1886 in New London, Connecticut, he returned home, and became seriously ill and, on November16, ordered nearly all of his papers, both personal and official, burned. The next morning, Arthur suffered a cerebral hemorrhage and never regained consciousness he died the following day, November 18, at the age of 57. On November22, a private funeral was held at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York City, attended by President Cleveland and exPresident Hayes, among other notables. Arthur was buried with his family members and ancestors in the Albany Rural Cemetery in Menands, New York. He was laid beside his wife in a sarcophagus on a large corner of the plot. In 1889, a monument was placed on Arthurs burial plot by sculptor Ephraim Keyser of New York, consisting of a giant bronze female angel figure placing a bronze palm leaf on a granite sarcophagus. In 1898, the Arthur memorial statue a , bronze figure of Arthur standing on a Barre Granite pedestal was created by sculptor George Edwin Bissell and installed at Madison Square, in New York City. The statue was dedicated in 1899 and unveiled by Arthurs sister, Mary Arthur McElroy. At the dedication, Secretary of War Elihu Root described Arthur as, ...wise in statesmanship and firm and effective in administration, while acknowledging that Arthur was isolated in office and unloved by his own party. Arthurs unpopularity in life carried over into his assessment by historians, and his reputation after leaving office disappeared. By 1935, historian George F. Howe said that Arthur had achieved an obscurity in strange contrast to his significant part in American history. By 1975, however, Thomas C. Reeves would write that Arthurs appointments, if unspectacular, were unusually sound the corruption and scandal that dominated business and politics of the period did not tarnish his administration. As 2004 biographer Zachary Karabell wrote, although Arthur was physically stretched and emotionally strained, he strove to do what was right for the country. Indeed, Howe had earlier surmised, Arthur adopted code for his own political behavior but subject to three restraints he remained to everyone a man of his word he kept scrupulously free from corrupt graft he maintained a personal dignity, affable and genial though he might be. These restraints... distinguished him sharply from the stereotype politician. See also List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience Arthur Cottage, ancestral home, Cullybackey, County Antrim, Northern Ireland Julia Sand Notes References Further reading Books Rhodes, James Ford. History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 1877 1896 online complete old, factual and heavily political, by winner of Pulitzer Prize Articles Newspapers Other websites External links White House biography Essays on Chester Arthur and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady, from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Chester Arthur A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Life Portrait of Chester A. Arthur, from CSPANs American Presidents Life Portraits , August 6, 1999 Life and Career of Chester A. Arthur, presentation by Zachary Karabell at the Kansas City Public Library, May 23, 2012 Chester A. Arthurs Presidency , a video by History.com Chester A. Arthurs Personal Manuscripts from Shapell.org Category1829 births Category1886 deaths Category19thcentury American Episcopalians Category19thcentury American politicians CategoryAmerican people of English descent CategoryAmerican people of ScotchIrish descent CategoryAmerican people of Welsh descent CategoryBurials at Albany Rural Cemetery CategoryCollectors of the Port of New York CategoryGarfield administration cabinet members CategoryNew York Republicans CategoryNew York Whigs CategoryPeople from Cohoes, New York CategoryPeople from Fairfield, Vermont CategoryPeople from Schaghticoke, New York CategoryPeople of Vermont in the American Civil War CategoryPresidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party Presidents of the United States CategoryRepublican Party vice presidential nominees CategoryRepublican Party Vice Presidents of the United States CategoryState and National Law School alumni CategoryUnion Army generals CategoryUnion College alumni CategoryUnited States presidential candidates, 1884 CategoryUnited States vicepresidential candidates, 1880 CategoryVermont Republicans CategoryVice Presidents of the United States CategoryArthur family CategoryPhi Beta Kappa members CategoryAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law CategoryCentury Associationmembers
The following discussion is closed. Please do not modify it. Subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. No further edits should be made to this discussion. Article promoted by Ian Rose via MilHistBot 0007, 23 January 2015 Ulysses S. Grant Nominator Coemgenus I am nominating this article for AClass review because I believe it meets the criteria. After it failed at FA, I believe I fixed all of the issues raised there. The closing delegate suggested an AClass review, and I agree. I think the military portions of Grants biography, especially, could be benefited by the knowledge of the reviewers at this project. Coemgenus 1227, 8 October 2014 Comments Gday, great work in bringing this one up to scratch. Unfortunately, Im afraid I am having trouble loading the article fully on my machine so I can review in too much depth, but I will try to offer some comments AustralianRupert 0243, 25 October 2014 the first paragraph of the Memorials and Presidential library section appears to be unreferenced, for Aclass I think we would want at least one citation at the end of the paragraph I added some citations. Coemgenus 1419, 25 October 2014 are there citationsreferences that could be added for the information in Notes C and D I notice that you have citations for all other notes Done. 89 of the nations 364 railroads went bankrupt, according to WPNUMNOTES we shouldnt start sentences with numerals I wasnt aware of the rule. I rewrote the sentence to fix it. Coemgenus 1419, 25 October 2014 is there a reference for this In the election of 1876, the remaining three Republican governments in the South fell to Redeemers, and the ensuing Compromise of 1877 marked the end of Reconstruction. Done. according to the MOS year ranges such as 1869 1877 should be presented as 1869 77. Regards, AustralianRupert 0243, 25 October 2014 Didnt know that one either. I prefer the other way, but no one is above the MoS, I suppose. Fixed. Gday, yes it seems a bit strange, apparently though there are a couple of exceptions to the rule also. For instance, date of birth and death parenteticals, etc. AustralianRupert 2154, 25 October 2014 Thanks for the thorough review If theres anything else you think is lacking, please let me know Coemgenus 1419, 25 October 2014 Gday, I had another quick look and made a couple of minor adjustments. Im still having trouble loading the page I think my old cluncker of a computer is on its way out. One thing I wonder about is the size of the lead I got pinged by another user who must have seen the ACR announcement I posted on the Milhist or US Wikiproject pages and they suggested that it might be too long. What are your thoughts about that AustralianRupert 2154, 25 October 2014 I think the lede is about right, but that may be because I know it used to be much longer. Its been a constant battle to keep out new tangential additions to the article. If you see something irrelevant or unnecessary, by all means strike it out. Ill give it another look today and see what can be trimmed. Coemgenus 1248, 26 October 2014 I trimmed it a bit yesterday. Coemgenus 1259, 27 October 2014 Image review Really dont care for the lead image. Awkward pose, downsampled, heavily damaged. Can you please go through, say, and find something better for a very photographed person If you dont want me doing it, could you at least do it yourself I actually like the picture, but Ill look for a better version. If you find something you think is more appropriate, by all means go for it.Coemgenus 1628, 2 November 2014 FileBrevet Second Lieutenant Ulysses S. Grant in 1843.jpg it would be nice to replace this, but 1843 was a bit of a nadir for the engraving art, so I guess it passes. FileHardscrabble.jpg is a downsample. Replace from TIFF Upgraded to FileHardscrabble.tiff. Coemgenus 1628, 2 November 2014 FileBattle of Jackson .jpg Meh. A higherres copy exists, but its pretty heavily damaged, and may not be that worth it. that said, the yellowed copy would probably be more visually interesting. I think youre right, I upgraded it to FileBattle of Jackson .tif. Coemgenus 1650, 2 November 2014 FileBattle of Missionary Ridge McCormick Harvesting.jpg Something terrible has happened to this image. The original is here and lacks the garish colours. It looks like it was taken from a previous, lowquality scan. Replace. Done, at FileBattle of Mission Ridge.jpg. Coemgenus 1741, 2 November 2014 FileGenUSGrant.jpg Extremely downscaled. is the fullsize. Done, at FileGeneral U.S. Grant.tif. Coemgenus 1741, 2 November 2014 FileLeeSurrenderstoGrantatAppomattox.jpg Acceptable, I guess. There really arent many good Appomattox images. FileJohnsonbanquet.jpg Documentation nil. Needs documented. I removed it. Its pretty badlooking and with no documentation, I cant argue we should keep it. Coemgenus 0106, 4 November 2014 FileSenateJohnsonImpeachmentTrials.jpg Not a great copy, but acceptable given alternatives. FilePresident Ulysses S. Grant seated portrait Brady.jpg scaled down a bit. is full size. Done, at FileUlysses S. Grant seated by Brady .tif. Coemgenus 2234, 2 November 2014 FilePresident Grant Thwarting Gold Ring 1869 Currier Ives.jpg A higherresolution, better scan is available from Done, at FileGrant Thwarting the Gold Ring 1869.tif. Coemgenus 2234, 2 November 2014 FileWardHuntBradyHandy.jpg might be better. Done, at FileWard Hunt .tif. Coemgenus 0103, 4 November 2014 FileUSGrantstandingpostbellum.jpg This is badly cropped. has more headroom. Done, at FileGrant standing postwar.tif. Coemgenus 1317, 4 November 2014 File50 USD Series 2004 Note Front.jpg wouldnt an older edition of the note be better, given the caption UserGodot recently added a bunch of featured images of banknotes, including FileUS50GC1928Fr2404.jpg, so I used that one. Coemgenus 1317, 4 November 2014 FileUlysses S. Grant Trapeze Cartoon Keppler Puck 1880.tif bit oversaturated. I uploaded a more natural version. Coemgenus 1317, 4 November 2014 Oppose . FileJohnsonbanquet.jpg is the big blocker. Adam Cuerden 1719, 1 November 2014 Mostly done now the one thing to note is the JPEGs on the Library of Congress are smaller than the TIFFs, so FileBattleofMissionRidge.jpg is smaller than it needs to be, but I can fix that. Ward Hunt could be cropped better, but that needs a bit of knowledge of restoration, so Ill do that too. Adam Cuerden 1519, 4 November 2014 Thanks for the review and the support. I downloaded Mission Ridge as a tiff, but it was too big to upload. I dont know enough about these things to shrink it, but if you do Im sure it will be the better for it. Coemgenus 1603, 4 November 2014 Probably the easiest solution if you dont want to have to worry too much about things is to use Commons Upload Wizard It uses chunked uploads term, ignore if desired allows uploading files something like ten times the size of nonchunked term, ignore if desired uploads. Adam Cuerden 2330, 4 November 2014 Comments . As always, feel free to revert my copyediting. This looks a lot better than when it was at FAC. I got down to Civilian life so far so good. Im not supporting, but I think the prose will be good enough to put it up at FAC. These are my edits. Dank 0419, 22 November 2014 Thanks, Dank, your copyedits are always welcome and appreciated. Coemgenus 1429, 22 November 2014 Continuing. Stanton and Grant quickly surmised that the terms were much too lenient Why did they have to guess Did they not know Shermans terms No Sherman came up with the terms on his own. Coemgenus 1500, 19 January 2015 Reference 325 is now a strange redirect. I looked at it because it because this is hard to read From 1890 to 1940, the Department of Interior and the National Park Service called part of what is now Kings Canyon National Park, General Grant National Park, named for the General Grant sequoia.. It would probably work better in passive voice. Im a passive voice hater, but youre right, it works better here. Ill change it, and look into that ref. Coemgenus 1500, 19 January 2015 Support on prose per standard disclaimer. These are my edits. Fantastic writing, especially compared to earlier trips to FAC. Dank 1453, 19 January 2015 Thanks for the review and for your copyedits. Much appreciated Coemgenus 1500, 19 January 2015 It would be great to get this on the Main Page on one of the 150year anniversaries coming up in March or April, if the nominators are up for it. Dank 1713, 19 January 2015 I agree After this review, Id like to give it a good lookingover before nominating it for FA. With luck, we could be finished in time for the anniversary of Appomattox. Coemgenus 1748, 19 January 2015 Comments from Wehwalt Starting ... Lede Im a bit wondering at the leading the Radical Republicans bit. The Republicans were already starting to be in retreat on Reconstruction, and Grants policies continued that trend. Do you mean just to remove the word radical If so, done. Coemgenus 2207, 18 December 2014 In his second term, the Republican coalitions in the South fell apart and conservative Democrats regained control of each Southern state. This sounds like a cause and effect. Id make the argument that the Democrats bore some responsibility. Certainly in South Carolina, the Democrats basically won on terror and fraud. And why is this mentioned two separate places in one paragraph And cant the two Indian war references in that paragraph be consolidated Changed the redeemer sentence to In his second term, the Republican coalitions in the South fell apart as conservative white Democrats regained control of Southern states through terror and disenfranchisement of black Southerners. And I consolidated that whole last sentence, which was just repetitive. Alabama Claims Alabama should be italicized. Done. Coemgenus 2207, 18 December 2014 Their consensus remains below average. I know what you are trying to say here, but some rephrasing is needed. Yes, I wasnt happy with that, either. Should be better now. Coemgenus 2207, 18 December 2014 Military career Mexicans agreed to peace probably should be a pipe to Treaty of Guadaloupe Hidalgo. You need a source. Done. Coemgenus 0159, 20 December 2014 divided his army I would say divided his forces to avoid a repetition of army later in sentence. Done. Coemgenus 0159, 20 December 2014 Grant chose to remain in the U.S. military after his mandatory service had expired in 1847.. This feels awkward, and I think its the after in combination with the past perfect. What about Grants mandatory service had expired during the war he chose to remain in the Army. Changed to Grants mandatory service had expired during the war, but he chose to remain in the Army. Coemgenus 0159, 20 December 2014 That same year, maybe Later that year, Done. Coemgenus 0159, 20 December 2014 repeal the resignation probably better, refuse the resignation. I think I commented on this on my earlier run through the article. Done. Sorry, I thought Id fixed all of the problems from the failed FA.Coemgenus 0159, 20 December 2014 Civilian life By August 1863, I think this sentence should be in the Civil War section, its where people would look for this information Moved and shortened. Coemgenus Civil War inexperienced volunteers I would cut inexperienced, Im not sure it adds anything. Besides, they werent inexperienced for long. Done. Coemgenus 2002, 21 December 2014 Shiloh had grown Why had Have we gone back in time When are we speaking of here, anyway Changed to now numbered the Confederate army of roughly equal strength probably should be a Confederate army ... I note you use Confederate Army with caps later in the paragraph. Done both. Coemgenus 2002, 21 December 2014 Pittsburg Landing near Shiloh . 57 spacing problem here. Id fix it but am doing this offline. Done. Coemgenus 2002, 21 December 2014 having lacked reinforcements lack of reinforcements Done. Coemgenus 2002, 21 December 2014 stopped fighting this reads oddly, like they went on strike or something. Is there a more military phrasing that can be made Changed to halted. to date, this is unclear in meaning. You probably mean to that point. More died at Antietam, as I recall, but that was later. Yes, youre right. Changed. Coemgenus 2002, 21 December 2014 More soon.Wehwalt 0122, 18 December 2014 You are not consistent reelection vs. reelection Should all be unhyphenated now. Coemgenus 2013, 21 December 2014 Vicksburg Id mention what state it is in at some point. Better yet, a map. I added the state. Im not sure theres room for a map without cutting a picture. Ill think about it. Coemgenus 2013, 21 December 2014 did support perhaps, showed his support for Done. Coemgenus 2013, 21 December 2014 I dont like the way this gives the setting for Vicksburg, then goes back and discusses Gen. Order 11. I would move the info on the order and other 1862 material into the previous section. Go from the setting of Vicksburg to the Vicksburg campaign. Moved and tightened prose. Coemgenus 2013, 21 December 2014 Grant then made a series water movements and diggings attempting to bypass Vicksburg guns missing of before water and probably an s after Vicksburg. Also, what water movements and diggings are is not clear to me. I changed that whole awkward sentence to Grant then attempted a series of maneuvers through the waterlogged terrain to bypass Vicksburgs guns these proved ineffective. Chattanooga Two consecutive sentences begin On November 2x, Thanks for noticing. I hate that lazy form of prose that runs rampant across the encyclopedia. Changed. Coemgenus 2026, 21 December 2014 blow up part of the enemy ... pipe to Battle of the Crater. Done. Coemgenus 2026, 21 December 2014 the citys bluffs Which city Was Petersburg a city in 1864 Yes, this was confusing. Changed to in the James River. Coemgenus 2026, 21 December 2014 Lincolns assassination army intelligence sources were able to narrow the existing threats in Washington Huh I cut the two sentences there too much information in an already overlarge article. Coemgenus 2026, 21 December 2014 Commanding general At the wars end, Grant remained commander of the army, with duties that included enforcement of Congressional Reconstruction of the former Confederate states Congressional Reconstruction could not have started before Congress convened in December 1865 and didnt get started in earnest until the following year. Before that, it was Presidential Reconstruction. I dont know how the word Congressional got in there Fixed. Coemgenus 2040, 21 December 2014 Johnson argued for a moderate approach to Reconstruction, Hm. Perhaps rather than the conclusion, put in the specifics here as you have them in the sentence beginning Johnson advocated. I think the way you have it might be disagreed with, with the key word being moderate Yes. I reworked he section to state the facts of what Johnson wanted, instead of a lazy characterization. Coemgenus 2040, 21 December 2014 Johnson was about to attempt to unilaterally seat Southern Congressmen I dont see how he could do this, and more than that, why what you relate regarding weapons would prevent or otherwise him from doing it. Yes, that misunderstands the source material 2040, 21 December 2014 lest he be rendered politically irrelevant Short of being found in bed with a live boy or a dead girl, I dont see how Grant becomes politically irrelevant here. Hes still General of the Army and a huge hero and the favorite in the next election. Yes. Deleted that clause. Coemgenus 2040, 21 December 2014 This public humiliation humiliation seems a bit strong. Changed to public insult. Coemgenus 2040, 21 December 2014 1868 campaign Grant at the age of fortysix was the youngest nineteenth century presidential candidate to take office. Unless Im missing someone, he was the youngest president to that point, period. Fixed. Coemgenus 1847, 24 December 2014 Johnson declined to ride in Grants carriage or attend the inauguration at the Capitol. The Johnson article says Grant would not ride with Johnson. If I recall correctly, my Seward sources say the same thing. Also that Grant refused to appoint a liaison to the outgoing administration, as was customary. There was snubbing on both sides, but it looks like most of it was on Grant. Changed it, with citation. Coemgenus 1457, 27 December 2014 Presidency Secretary of Navy of the Navy. Similarly, of the Treasury. Used in subsequent sections as well. Also of Interior, later. Fixed. Coemgenus 1457, 27 December 2014 Whats the 1789 statute all about Explained and reworded, with citation. Coemgenus 1457, 27 December 2014 Fifteenth Amendment is not linked on first use. Fixed. Coemgenus 1457, 27 December 2014 Indian peace Your capitalization of army seems inconsistent Fixed for this section. Ill keep an eye out in for it as I go. Coemgenus 1519, 27 December 2014 Grants Peace Policy why the caps Not quite sure. I dont think its wellknown enough to be considered a proper name. Fixed. Coemgenus 1519, 27 December 2014 I find it surprising the article lacks a mention of the transcontinental railroad, completed under Grant, and that certainly affected his Indian policy, among other policies. Just flipping through some of the sources now, I see that the railroads opposed Indian citizenship, but I see little mention of Indians and the transcontinental. If I come across more, Ill add it where appropriate. Coemgenus 1519, 27 December 2014 Foreign policy I dont recall Seward trying to buy any more of the Dominican Republic than Samana Bay, and dont recall Haiti Two concepts got conflated there. Seward recommended the Danish Virgin Islands, Johnson wanted all of Hispaniola. Fixed now. Coemgenus 1519, 27 December 2014 William H. Seward, Secretary of State under Lincoln and Johnson Fixed. Coemgenus 1519, 27 December 2014 it would decrease the number of autonomous nations run by Africans in the western hemisphere to zero, unless Im wrong. If Im right, Sumners objection, to eliminating the only nation outside Africa run by Africans, could be stated more clearly. Yes, that makes sense. Is there a reason for a second link to Hamilton Fish No, its close enough to the first that we dont need it linked again. Coemgenus 1519, 27 December 2014 Sumner opposed the thirdparty negotiated JohnsonClarendon Convention settlement, that was rejected by the Senate, You might want to mention this was under Johnsons presidency and that the Johnson of the settlements name is a different Johnson. I removed the JohnsonClarendon name, and hopefully clarified it a bit. Coemgenus 1519, 27 December 2014 I am not sure that the stated reason for the Alabama claims makes it clear to the reader why the US considered Britain liable. Though Seward most stridently did object to the declaration of belligerency. Better now Coemgenus 1519, 27 December 2014 Gold standard The description of Gould and Fisks maneuvers seems overly detailed. I condensed it a bit. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 The tale of Grant trying to get the nation back on the gold standard is presented very approvingly. I doubt a Keynesian would agree. Just saying. Im not sure I agree, either, but it was the economic consensus at the time, I think. Since his first election Grant sided with both capital and civil rights interests that alienated some party leaders. This could be written more clearly. I think its clearer now. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 enforce its recommendations implement its recommendations, perhaps. Done. 1604, 27 December 2014 Many of such men bolted ahem Many of that faction split from the party in 1872... Better Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 Horace Greeley did I mention hes at PR I did not know that. Glad to hear it Ill take a look if I can. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 The meaning of the cartoon used to illustrate the 1872 campaign is probably incomprehensible to the reader, who probably cant tell which Greeley is without a scorecard. I would find a more illustrative Nast cartoon. There are plenty on the web and at Commons. Im not sure. FileSchurz Defeat of Liberal Republicans.jpg and FileNast Greeley Grant.jpg could work, but theyre all inscrutable to someone not familiar with the period. Is there a particular one youd suggest Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 gold dollar as the monetary standard I would insert sole before monetary. The dollar had always been defined in terms of gold, the change was it was no longer defined in terms of silver. Done. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 Critics who wanted more money in circulation to raise prices well ... I think the point was easier credit, though they certainly, taking the debtors standpoint, didnt mind inflation. Critics who wanted more money in circulation to facilitate easier credit... might be better Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 failing to fully sell bonds this reads a bit foggily. Might be better now ...a New York brokerage house collapsed it failed to sell all of the bonds issued by Cookes railroad, the Northern Pacific Railway... Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 After the Panic, since it really wasnt over yet, I would omit this phrase. The end of the sentence dates it. Done. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 I would make it clear what specie is in the text. Done. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 the number of greenbacks amount, not number. Done. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 Grants first endorsement perhaps, Grants endorsement in advance Done. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 Interior Department is not consistently capitalized. Fixed. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 increased qualified candidates increased the number of qualified candidates, perhaps. Fixed. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 to schools that have any religious affiliation reads oddly, , perhaps to schools with religious affiliation Fixed. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 The caption on the BEP portrait of Grant should not end in a period as it is not a complete sentence. Fixed. Coemgenus 1604, 27 December 2014 More anon.Wehwalt 2221, 20 December 2014 Even with your change, you are still italicizing and capitalizing Alabama claims three different ways. Should be all capitalized and italicized now. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 That case, which was unpopular with business interests, held that the federal debt incurred before 1862 be paid in gold, not greenbacks I dont understand this. Business preferred to be paid in greenbacks Im not sure what that means either. Changed to In that ruing, which was unpopular with business interests, the court held that the federal government did not have the power to make greenbacks legal tender for payment of debts contracted in gold dollars. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Conking. Conking ... Cushing. Cushing back to back names are disfavored Fixed Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Election of 1876 You have three consecutive sentences that start Grant. Fixed Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 World tour Travelling to London, the Grants dined with Queen Victoria at Windsor Castle, and Grant gave several speeches in the city The Windsor Castle is causing a problem with city as of course Windsor Castle is not in London. Quite right Fixed Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Siam Singapore, and Vietnam so youre using the old name for Thailand but the current name for Vietnam Changed it to Cochinchina . Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Third term Electoral College214 to 155 hyphen trouble Fixed. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Business ventures The machinations of Mr. Ward are given in too much detail. I trimmed the detail a bit, but I think its important to know why the firm went broke that it was criminality, not bad luck or a bad economy. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Memoirs After private services, the military in New York placed Grants body on a special funeral train and traveled via West Point to New York City, So the military went via West Point I cut via West Point. I actually hate using the word via in most situations. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Id shorten Grand Army of the Republic to GAR instead of saying Grand Army for short. Fixed. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Historical reputation Id split that first paragraph somewhere Done. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Dictionary of American Biography probably should be italicized Done. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Grants reputation, for the most part, remained popular are reputations popular Fixed. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 Why is Grant Ward italicized I have no idea. Fixed. Coemgenus 0217, 28 December 2014 I would more clearly separate his military reputation from his political one if possible. You seem to jump around a bit, and there are some questions of chronological order as well. Saying that Grant was savaged by the Dunning School in the early 20th century near the end, when youve mentioned more recent and more favorable comments, seems a bit out of order. I rearranged it and tightened the language, but the military and political reputations are still combined. Its kind of hard to separate it without becoming repetitive. Coemgenus 0003, 29 December 2014 Thats it. Its much improved from last time I saw it. I especially like the historical section.Wehwalt 0053, 21 December 2014 Thanks very much for the thorough review Coemgenus 0003, 29 December 2014 Support Id just like to focus on the Historical reputation section. It starts off fine, but becomes muddled, with comments appearing out of chronological order. Here is the order of events After the war, Grant was seen as a national hero As the Lost Cause myth took hold in the 1890s and early 1900s, Grant became a drunken bumbler and butcher as a general, and a corrupt and incompetent president After World War II, his military reputation was salvaged, and he became seen as a grandfather of the kind of total war that was associated with Americas victory in World War II In the 1970s, the World War II military legacy became attainted as a result of the war in Vietnam, and he became an incompetent butcher again A reassessment of the Reconstruction in the 1980s saw a revival of interest in Grant as president, and a corresponding reevaluation Leading to where we are today, which is somewhat mixed Hawkeye7 0032, 3 January 2015 Ive tweaked the order and wording to be more in line with this. The 1970s reassessment sounds familiar to me, but Im coming up short on sources. Is there anything you can recommend Ill keep looking in the meantime. Coemgenus 2058, 4 January 2015 Yes I do Email me if you dont have JSTOR. Hawkeye7 2248, 4 January 2015 Got it Thanks for finding that. Ill read it and incorporate it. Coemgenus 2317, 4 January 2015 Moved to support. Hawkeye7 0657, 14 January 2015 Comments Support No dab links . No issues with external links . Some images lack Alt Text so you might consider adding it . No duplicate links . The Citation Check Tool shows no issues with reference consolidation The Earwig Tool reveals no issues with copyright violation or close paraphrasing, only a few wikimirrors etc. In the lead In July 1863, after a series of coordinated battles, Grant defeated Confederate armies ..., is there a missing word here before Confederate armies Maybe. I added a the, but Im not sure its necessary. Coemgenus 2058, 4 January 2015 ...and destroyed the Ku Klux Klan... Im no expert on US history but this seems to be an overstatement, doesnt this organisation still exist I wonder if a less equivocal term might be used than destroyed, perhaps reduced the power of or prosecuted etc. The KKK was pretty well smashed, although other white supremacist groups took its place. More to the point, after Reconstruction ended, there was less need for terror, in the mind of white Democrats, since they by then controlled the apparatus of the state. Ill change to prosecuted, unless I come up with something better. Coemgenus 2058, 4 January 2015 Some inconsistency in name of Grants daughter in one place referred to as Ellen and another as Nellie Its the reverse christened Ellen, called Nellie. Should be clearer now. Coemgenus 2058, 4 January 2015 ...meeting with Lincoln to devise strategies of total war against the Confederacy..., should this be strategies for total war Perhaps also wikilink total war. I changed it to a strategy of total war and linked it. Coemgenus 2058, 4 January 2015 Typo here I think Grant was initially skeptical, but at the urging of the Admiral Porter..., specifically the Admiral Porter. Yes, removed the the. Coemgenus 2058, 4 January 2015 ... believing that England should directly pay 2 billion in gold..., probably should be Britain nor England. Right. Changed to Britain. Coemgenus 2058, 4 January 2015 ...and the defeat of Colonel Custer..., should just be Custer, removing rank following formal introduction at first use per WPSURNAME. Done. Coemgenus 2058, 4 January 2015 In 1884, Grants personal reputation came under suspicion after the collapse of Grant Ward, but rebounded after the immense popularity of his 1885 Memoirs. Is there a reference to support this No, strangely. Ive reworked the sentence, with citation. Coemgenus 2058, 4 January 2015 I ended up cutting that line when I rewrote some of the historical reputation section. Coemgenus 1723, 5 January 2015 A few of the references are missing isbns oclcs issns. These can be found through WorldCat.org so you might consider adding them for consistency. I didnt even know ISSNs were a thing Ive added them, and the OCLCs that were missing. Coemgenus 2129, 4 January 2015 Otherwise this looks very good to me. Anotherclown 0245, 3 January 2015 Thanks for the review Coemgenus 2129, 4 January 2015 Gday Ive had another look now. Happy that you have addressed all my comments and can see quite a lot of work has occurred making other improvements as well. My only remaining concern is the amount of uncited material that there is in the article. Indeed there are quite a few paragraphs with sentences at the end that do not have a citation, which makes it unclear what the source is . With the exception of the information about Grant appearing on the 50 dollar bill and possibly the stamps, the majority do not appear to be WPBLUE so they will need citations. If these can be added Id be most happy to support. If you need me to point out the places Im talking about pls let me know and Ill add citation needed tags. All the best. Anotherclown 0416, 14 January 2015 Ive added these tags now. Anotherclown 0804, 20 January 2015 I think all of the tags are replaced by proper citations now. As to the rest, Im not sure citations are needed. WPCITE says Wikipedias Verifiability policy requires inline citations for any material challenged or likely to be challenged, and for all quotations, anywhere in article space. I cant see any of these being challenged. Maybe Im wrong, but the idea that theres a statue in a park seems noncontroversial. If you disagree, Ill see what I can do about getting some sort of citations for them. Coemgenus 1357, 20 January 2015 Yes I agree, happy with the citations now. Ive added my support now. Anotherclown 0453, 21 January 2015 Comments At Monterrey, he demonstrated his equestrian ability, carrying a dispatch through sniperlined streets while mounted in one stirrup. I couldnt really envisage in my mind how he would look while mounted in one stirrup Im not a horseman myself, and I couldnt quite see why he wouldnt have just put his other foot in his other stirrup. Is there any way of making it clearer why he did this Yeah, that didnt make much sense. I looked it up in Smith and rewrote it, with a new citation. Coemgenus 1653, 5 January 2015 He grew unhappy separated from his family, and rumors circulated that he was drinking to excess. have historians formed a judgement about his likely drinking during this period Theres a note to that effect, which I moved up from later in the section. Coemgenus 1653, 5 January 2015 He was responsible for issuing supplies and horses to the Corps of Engineers headed by Captain George B. McClellan who became upset when Grant was rumored to have been on a drunken spree.30 The commanding officer at Fort Humboldt, brevet Lieutenant Colonel Robert C. Buchanan, received reports that Grant became intoxicated offduty while seated at the pay officers table. This was a little unclear as to whether the drunken spree is the same as the offduty incident, or if these are different issuesincidents. The McClellan sentence was added after the rest of the paragraph was written. Its just repetitive, so I cut it altogether. Coemgenus 1653, 5 January 2015 Some of the numbers as words are compliant with the MOS, I think fortysix, sixteen, thirtyseven etc. should normally be 46, 16, 37 etc. Fixed. Coemgenus 1653, 5 January 2015 A lot of the names of other people in the article are given complete with middle names e.g. several nonpoliticians to his cabinet, including Adolph E. Borie and Alexander Turney Stewart. My personal advice would to normally express these in the simplest form possible, e.g. Adolph Borie and Alexander Stewart, as it would make some of the paragraphs easier to read. In most cases, theyre not going to be confused with anyone else I think. I thought a bit about that as I wrote. In the end, I opted to use the most common form of the persons name, usually based on the sources and how their articles are titled. Coemgenus 1653, 5 January 2015 Not an ACR requirement, but if it was going to FAC, Id be recommending making the paragraphs shorter some of them are very long, and particularly hard to read on a screen as a result. Good point. I split a few, but feel free to do more if you think its better. Coemgenus 1653, 5 January 2015 There seems to be a body of literature quite critical of Grants Indian policy, and giving a very different slant on his approach some Google books links with examples of this are Im not an expert on Grant or the Indian policies of the period, but should this be reflected somewhere, even if as a minority opinion Ill take a look there, and reexamine the main sources for more nuance. Coemgenus 1653, 5 January 2015 Should the charges of drunkeness, which seem to have dogged his career and have been brought up by later historians, be mentioned in the lead Hchc2009 1358, 3 January 2015 Its one of the main things people know about Grant, unfortunately, but maybe having it in the lede is a bit much. Ill cut it. I misunderstood. I thought you were saying it was in there, and shouldnt be. Youre saying maybe it should be in the lede Im reluctant to add it, both because its a pretty minor part of Grants life, and because the lede is already longer than Id like. Coemgenus 1656, 5 January 2015 Thanks for the review Coemgenus 1653, 5 January 2015 , , , and I think Ive addressed all of your comments. Coemgenus 1400, 13 January 2015 Thanks, Ill give it another read through.Wehwalt 1453, 13 January 2015 Im doing some hands on copyediting, but there are still a few issues I see army and academy are inconsistently capitalized. Should be fixed. Army is now only capitalized as part of a proper name, like Army of the Potomac The failures confirmed Jesse Grants belief that his son had no head for business, frustrating both father and son. Technically you are saying that the confirmation of JGs belief frustrated both father and son. In a way, thats true, but I think it should be rephrased to make the failures directly responsible for the frustration. I deleted the whole clause. Its kind of repetitive. Something could be said about the strategic significance of the capture of Henry and Donelson, which controlled the river traffic in central Tennessee. Good point. Done. nine miles south at Pittsburg Landing near Shiloh nine miles south of what Also you probably should use a convert template there. I think thats a relic of editing and overediting. I took out nine miles south Coemgenus 1833, 17 January 2015 How could Grant remain at home in Galena during the 68 campaign Wasnt he still in the army I added some detail to clarify it. According to McFeely, Grant remained in Washington until July, then went to Galena until at least election day. There was a telegraph connection, but it seems to have been used for campaign business. He didnt return to his office in the War Department until after the election. Coemgenus 1833, 17 January 2015 or attend the inauguration at the Capitol Im not sure this is 100 correct. According to my Seward refs, there were negotiations and the proposal was that they ride in carriages side by side, with Johnson on the right, in the position of honor. And Seward still hoped to persuade Johnson to go even on the morning of March 4. I changed it to Grants presidency began with a break from tradition, as Johnson did not attend Grants inauguration at the Capitol or ride with him as he departed the White House for the last time.sfnMcFeely 1981p287 Theres a lot of notesending and protocol issues that I left out for brevity. Briefly, as I understand it, both men wanted to look like they wanted to go together, but neither actually did. federal laws would be enforced in the South when state courts and prosecutors were reluctant to do so. is this the job of state courts and prosecutors, to enforce federal laws Clearly not I cut everything after in the South, since it was nonsense. If that Grant BEP portrait is the one on the 50 bill, thats worth a mention in the caption. You might want to consult with . Its not. I have never seen this portrait used on U.S. currency. I suspect it was engraved by G.F.C. Smillie, BEP Chief Engraver . The 50 portrait was engraved by John Eissler and the 5 silver certificate was engraved by Lorenzo Hatch.Godot13 0442, 16 January 2015 The saga of replacing Chase as Chief Justice could probably be shortened. Done. and South Carolina to keep the peace I suppose, though it really had more to do with the HamptonChamberlain disputed election than HayesTilden. Theres an unreferenced sentence at the end of the section. Youre right, it did. Dont know when that bit got added, but I took it out and reworked the whole paragraph. I should keep a closer eye on things Returning to the continent, Im thinking that in this context, continent should be capitalized. After all, whether they like it or not, Britains in Europe Done. Maybe well revise it in May after the election Im not sure that your pipe of securities to security interest is correct. Surely what they were buying was stocks and bonds Security interests are ... well, kinda like a lien. I should probably have taken secured transactions in law school. Changed to Security . Thats it, again. Well done. I saw your nomination of Weaver, I will get to it but it may take me several days as I have several other reviews promised and Im trying to finish up Tillman.Wehwalt 0243, 16 January 2015 Pitchfork Ben Looking forward to it. Thanks for the review. Coemgenus 1859, 17 January 2015 Comment . I see everyone who might have had further questions was pinged on the 13th. Reading quickly, I dont see evidence of questions that havent been addressed. Ill report this at the coords talk page for closing, but Ill keep an eye here in case lastminute questions pop up. Anotherclown, are you happy with the referencing Dank 1400, 20 January 2015 Yes thanks. Anotherclown 0453, 21 January 2015 The discussion above is closed. Please do not modify it. Subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. No further edits should be made to this discussion.
